---
layout: calvin-chapter
book_id: 1timothy
book_name: 提摩太前书
chapter: 3
section: "3"
section_title: "第3章"
sections_list: "preface,dedication,introduction,1,2,3,4,5,6"
total_chapters: 6
header-img: psalm-bg-mountain.jpg
date: 2026-04-30 20:25
---

CHAPTER 3
1 Timothy 3:1-7
1. Certus sermo, si quis episcopatum appetit,
praeclarum opus desiderat.1. This is a true saying, If a man desire the
office of a bishop, he desireth a good work.
2. Oportet ergo Episcopum irreprehensibilem
esse, unius uxoris maritum, sobrium,2. A bishop then must be blameless, the
husband of one wife, vigilant, sober, of good
behaviour, given to hospitality, apt to teach; temperantem, compositum, ( vel, honestum ,)
hospitalem, aptum ad docendum.
3. Non vinolentum, ( vel, ferocem ,) non
percussorem, non turpiter lucri cupidum, sed
aequum, alienum a pugnis, alienum ab avaritia.3. Not given to wine, no striker, not greedy
of filthy lucre; but patient, not a brawler, not
covetous;
4. Qui domui suae bene praesit, qui filios
habeat in subjectione, cum omni reverentia.4. One that ruleth well his own house, having
his children in subjection with all gravity;
5. Quodsi quis propriae domui praeesse non
novit, ecclesiam Dei quomodo curabit?5. (For if a man know not how to rule his own
house, how shall he take care of the church of
God?)
6. Non novicium, ne inflatus in
condemnationem incidat diaboli.6. Not a novice, lest being lifted up with pride
he fall into the condemnation of the devil.
7. Oportet autem illum et bonum testimonium
habere ab extraneis, ne in probum incidat et
laqueum diaboli.7. Moreover he must have a good report of
them which are without; lest he fall into reproach
and the snare of the devil.
1It is a true saying  Chrysostom thinks, that this is the conclusion of the preceding doctrine.
But I do not approve of the opinion; for Paul commonly makes use of this form of expression as a
prelude to what he is about to introduce, Besides, in the former discourse there was no need of so
strong an affirmation; but what he is now about to say, is somewhat more weighty. Let these words,
therefore, be received as a preface intended to point out the importance of the subject; for Paul now
begins a new discourse about ordaining pastors, and appointing the government of the Church.
If any one desireth the office of a bishop46 Having forbidden women to teach, he now takes
occasion to speak of the office of a bishop. First, that it may be more clearly seen that it was not
without reason that he refused to allow women to undertake so arduous a work; secondly, that it
might not be thought that, by excluding women only, he admitted all men indiscriminately; and,
thirdly, because it was highly proper that Timothy and others should be reminded what conscientious
watchfulness ought to be used in the election of bishops. Thus the context, in my opinion, is as if
Paul had said, that so far are women from being fit for undertaking so excellent an office, that not
even men ought to be admitted into it without distinction.
He desireth an excellent work  The Apostle affirms that this is no inconsiderable work, such as
any man might venture to undertake. When he says that it is      , I have no doubt that he alludes to
the ancient Greek proverb, often quoted by Plato,                , which means that “those things which
are excellent, are also arduous and difficult;” and thus he unites difficulty with excellence, or rather
he argues thus, that it does not belong to every person to discharge the office of a bishop, because
it is a thing of great value.
I think that Paul’s meaning is now sufficiently clear; though none of the commentators, so far
as I perceive, have understood it. The general meaning is, that a selection ought to be made in
admitting bishops, because it is a laborious and difficult charge; and that they who aim at it should
carefully consider with themselves, whether or not they were able to bear so heavy a burden.
Ignorance is always rash; and a mature knowledge of things makes a man modest. How comes it
that they who have neither ability nor wisdom often aspire so confidently to hold the reins of
government, but because they rush forward with their eyes shut? On this subject Quintilian remarked,
that the ignorant speak boldly, while the greatest orators tremble.
For the purpose of restraining such rashness in desiring the office of a bishop, Paul states, first,
that this is not an indolent rank, but a work ; and next, that it is not any kind of work, but excellent,
and therefore toilsome and full of difficulty, as it actually is. It is no light matter to be a representative
of the Son of God, in discharging an office of such magnitude, the object of which is to erect and
extend the kingdom of God, to procure the salvation of souls which the Lord himself hath purchased
with his own blood, and to govern the Church, which is God’s inheritance. But it is not my intention
at present to make a sermon, and Paul will again glance at this subject in the next chapter.
Here a question arises: “Is it lawful, in any way, to desire the office of a bishop?” On the one
hand, it appears to be highly improper for any one to anticipate, by his wish, the calling of God,
and yet Paul, while he censures a rash desire, seems to permit it to be desired with prudence and
modesty. I reply, if ambition is condemned in other matters, much more severely ought it to be
condemned in “the office of a bishop.” But Paul speaks of a godly desire, by which holy men wish
to employ that knowledge of doctrine which they possess for the edification of the Church. For, if
it were altogether unlawful to desire the office of a teacher, why should they who spend all their
youth in reading the Holy Scriptures prepare themselves by learning? What are the theological
schools but nurseries of pastors?
Accordingly, they who have been thus instructed not only may lawfully devote themselves and
their labors to God by a voluntary offering, but even ought to do so, and that too, before they have
been admitted unto the office; provided that, nevertheless, they do not thrust themselves forward,
and do not, even by their own wish, make themselves bishops, but are only ready to discharge the
46 “Ou, Si aucun a affection d’estre evesque .” — “Or, If any one hath a desire to be a bishop.”
office, if their labors shall be required. And if it turn out that, according to the lawful order; they
are not called, let them know that such was the will of God, and let them not take it in that others
have been preferred to them. But they who, without any selfish motive, shall have no other wish
than to serve God and the Church, will be affected in this manner; and, at the same time, will have
such modesty that they will not be at all envious, if others be preferred to them as being more
worthy.
If any one object, that the government of the Church is a matter of so great difficulty, that it
ought rather to strike terror into the minds of persons of sound judgment than to excite them to
desire it. I reply, that the desire of great men does not rest on confidence of their own industry or
virtue, but on the assistance of
“God, from whom is our sufficiency,”
as Paul says elsewhere. ( 2 Corinthians 3:5 .) At the same time, it is necessary to observe what
it is that Paul calls “the office of a bishop;” and so much the more, because the ancients were led
away, by the custom of their times, from the true meaning; for, while Paul includes generally all
pastors, they understand a bishop to be one who was elected out of each college to preside over his
brethren. Let us remember, therefore, that this word is of the same import as if he had called them
ministers, or pastors, or presbyters. 47
2A bishop, therefore, must be blameless  The particle therefore  confirms the exposition which
I have given; for, on account of the dignity of the office, he concludes that it is requisite that he be
a man endowed with rare gifts, and not any person taken out of the crowd. 48 If the expression used
had been “a good work,” as the ordinary translation has it, or “an honorable work,” ( honestam ,) as
Erasmus has translated it, the inference would not have been suitable.
He wishes a bishop to be blameless , 49 instead of which, in the Epistle to Titus, He has used
(Titus 1:7 ) the word           , meaning by both words, that he must not be marked by any infamy
that would lessen his authority. There will be no one found among men that is free from every vice;
but it is one thing to be blemished with ordinary vices, which do not hurt the reputation, because
they are found in men of the highest excellence, and another thing to have a disgraceful name, or
to be stained with any baseness. In order, therefore, that a bishop may not be without authority, he
enjoins that there shall be made a selection of one who has a good and honorable reputation, and
47 “Let us know that the Holy Spirit, speaking of those who are ordained ministers of the word of God, and who are elected
to govern the Church, calls them Pastors. And why? Because God wishes us to be a flock of sheep, to be guided by him, hearing
his voice, following his guidance, and living peaceably. Since, therefore the Church is compared to a flock, they who have the
charge of guiding the Church by the word of God are called Pastors. And next, the word Pastor means Elder not by age, but by
of office: as, at all times, they who govern have been called Elders, even among heathen nations. Now the Holy Spirit has retained
this metaphor, giving the name Elder to those who are chosen to proclaim the word of God. He likewise calls them Bishops, that
is persons who watch over the flock to show that it is not a rank unaccompanied by active exertion, when a man is called to that
office, and that he must not make an idol of it, but must know that he is sent to obtain the salvation of souls, and must be employed,
and watch, and labor, for that purpose. We see then the reason of these words; and since the Holy Spirit hath given them to us,
we must retain them, provided that they be applied to a good and holy use.” — Fr. Ser .
48 “Et non pas le premier qui se pourroit presenter .” — “And not the first that might offer himself.”
49᾿Ανεπίληπτον  — “This is properly an antagonistic term, signifying, ‘one who gives his adversary no hold upon him;’ but
it is often (as here) applied metaphorically to one who gives others no cause justly to accuse him. So Thucydides, v. 17, τοῖς
ἐχθροῖς ἀνεπίληπτον εἶναι . “Such (says a celebrated writer) is the perfect purity of our religion, such the innocence and virtue
which it exacts, that he must be a very good man indeed who lives up to it.” And when we consider the still greater requirements
in a teacher of religion, (who is to be an example to others,) and reflect on the injury done to religion through the side of false
professors, how much reason will there appear that such a one should be, as the apostle says, blameless.” — Broomfield.
not chargeable with any remarkable vice. Besides, he does not merely lay down a rule for Timothy
what sort of person he must select, but likewise reminds every one of those who aspire to that rank,
to institute a careful examination of himself and of his life.
The husband of one wife . It is a childish fancy to interpret this as meaning “the pastor of a single
church.” Another other exposition has been more generally received, that the person set apart to
that office must be one who has not been more than once married, that one wife being since dead,
so that now he is not a married man. But both in this passage and in Titus 1:6 , the words of the
apostle are, “Who is,” and not “Who hath been;” and in this very Epistle, where he treats of widows,
(1 Timothy 3:10 ,) he expressly makes use of the participle of the past tense. Besides, in this way
he would contradict himself; because elsewhere he declares that he has no wish to lay a snare on
the consciences.
The only true exposition, therefore, is that of Chrysostom, that in a bishop he expressly condemns
polygamy, 50 which at that time the Jews almost reckoned to be lawful. This corruption was borrowed
by them partly from sinful imitation of the Fathers, (for they who read that Abraham, Jacob, David,
and others of the same class, were married to more wives than one at the same time, thought that
it was lawful for them also to do the same) and partly from neighboring nations; for the inhabitants
of the East never observed that conscientiousness and fidelity in marriage which was proper.
However that might be, polygamy was exceedingly prevalent among them; 51 and therefore with
great propriety does Paul enjoin that a bishop should be free from this stain.
And yet I do not disapprove of the opinion of those who think that the Holy Spirit intended to
guard against the diabolical superstition which afterwards arose; as if he had said, “So far is it from
being right and proper that celibacy should be enforced on bishops, that marriage is a state highly
becoming in all believers.” In this way, he would not demand it as a thing necessary for them, but
would only praise it as not inconsistent with the dignity of the office. Yet the view which I have
already given is more simple and more solid, that Paul forbids polygamy in all who hold the office
of a bishop, because it is a mark of an unchaste man, and of one who does not observe conjugal
fidelity.
But there it might be objected, that what is sinful in all ought not to have been condemned or
forbidden in bishops alone. The answer is easy. When it is expressly prohibited to bishops, it does
not therefore follow that it is freely allowed to others. Beyond all doubt, Paul condemned universally
what was contrary to an unrepealed law of God; for it is a settled enactment,
“They shall be one flesh.” ( Genesis 2:24 .)
But he might, to some extent, bear with that in others which, in a bishop, would have been
excessively vile, and therefore not to be endured.
Nor is this a law laid down for the future, that no bishop, who already has one wife, shall marry
a second or a third, while the first wife is still living; but Paul excludes from the office of a bishop
any one who shall be guilty of such an enormity. Accordingly, what had been once done, and could
not be corrected, he reluctantly endures, but only in the common people. For what was the remedy
for those who, under Judaism, had fallen into the snare of polygamy? Should they have divorced
their second and third wives? Such a divorce would not have been free from doing wrong. Since,
50 “Qu’il condamne en l’Evesque d’avoir deux femmes ensemble vivantes .” — “That he condemns in a bishop the having
two wives living at the same time.”
51 “La polygamie estoit une chose toute commune entre les Juifs .” — “Polygamy was a thing quite common among the Jews.”
therefore, the deed was done, and could not be undone, he left it untouched, but with this exception,
that no bishop should be blemished by such a stain.
Sober, temperate, modest  The word which we have translated sober, Erasmus has translated
(vigilantem ) watchful. As the Greek word          52 admits of either signification, the readers may
make their own choice. I have preferred to translate        , temperate, instead of sober, because
          has a more extensive meaning than sobriety. Modest means one who conducts himself with
decency and propriety.
Hospitable53 The “hospitality” here spoken of, is toward strangers, and this was very common
among the ancients; for it would have been reckoned disgraceful for respectable persons, and
especially for those who were well known, to lodge in taverns. In the present day, the state of
matters is different; but this virtue is and always will be highly necessary in a bishop, for many
reasons. Besides, during the cruel persecution of the godly, many persons must have been constrained
frequently to change their habitation; and therefore it was necessary that the houses of bishops
should be a retreat for the exiles. In those times hard necessity compelled the churches to afford
mutual aid, so that they gave lodgings to one another. Now, if the bishops had not pointed out the
path to others in this department of duty, the greater part, following their example, would have
neglected the exercise of humanity, and thus the poor fugitives would have been greatly discouraged.
54
Able to teach  In the epistle to Titus, doctrine is expressly mentioned; here he only speaks briefly
about skill in communicating instruction. It is not enough to have profound learning, if it be not
accompanied by talent for teaching. There are many who, either because their utterance is defective,
or because they have not good mental abilities, or because they do not employ that familiar language
which is adapted to the common people, keep within their own minds the knowledge which they
possess. Such persons, as the phrase is, ought to Sing to themselves and to the muses. 55 They who
have the charge of governing the people, ought to be qualified for teaching. And here he does not
demand volubility of tongue, for we see many persons whose fluent talk is not fitted for edification;
but he rather commends wisdom in applying the word of God judiciously to the advantage of the
people.
It is worth while to consider how the Papists hold that the injunctions which the apostle gives
do not at all belong to them. I shall not enter into a minute explanation of all the details; but on this
one point what sort of diligence do they observe? And, indeed, that gift would be superfluous; for
52“Νηφάλιον , ‘vigilant or circumspect.’ In which sense the word occurs in the later writers; as, for instance, Phavorinus. The
force of the word is well expressed by the Pesch. Syr., ‘ mente sit vigilanti ’ Instead of νηφάλιον , (the reading of many of the
best MSS. and all the early editions,) νηφάλεον  was introduced by Beza, but without any sufficient reason; and the former has
been rightly restored by Wetstein, Griesbach, Matthaei, Tittnhann, and Vater. Here, then, we have a quality suggested by the
very term ἐπίσχοπος , which imports vigilant superintendence.” — Bloomfield.
53 “Recueillant volontiers les estrangers ;” — “Willingly entertaining strangers.”
54 “Let every one know that the virtues which are here required in all ministers of the word of God, are in order to give an
example to the flock. It is highly proper for every one to know that, when it is said that ministers should be wise, temperate, and
of good moral behavior, it is in order that others may be conformed to their example; for it is not for three or four only, but for
all in general, that these things are said. This is the way in which the example of men must be profitable to us, so far as they
shall conduct themselves properly, according to the will of God. And if they depart from that will ever so little, we must not
yield to them such authority as to follow them on that account; but we must attend to what Paul says, that we ought to follow
men so far as they are entirely conformed to the pure word of God, and are imitators of Jesus Christ, to lead us in the right way.”
— Fr. Ser.
55 “Il faut que tels s’employent a autre chose .” — “Such persons ought to be employed in something else.”
they banish from themselves the ministry of teaching as low and groveling, although this belonged
especially to a bishop. But everybody knows how far it is from observing Paul’s rule, to assume
the title of bishop, and boast proudly of enacting a character without speaking, provided only that
they make their appearance in a theatrical dress. As if a horned mitre, a ring richly set in jewels,
or a silver cross, and other trifles, accompanied by idle display, constituted the spiritual government
of a church, which can no more be separated from doctrine than any one of us can be separated
from his own soul.
3Not addicted to wine. By the word         , 56 which is here used, the Greeks denote not merely
drunkenness, but any intemperance in guzzling wine. And, indeed, to drink wine excessively is not
only very unbecoming in a pastor, but commonly draws along with it many things still worse; such
as quarrels, foolish attitudes, unchaste conduct, and other things which it is not necessary to describe.
But the contrast which is added shortly afterwards, shews that Paul goes farther than this.
Not a striker, not wickedly desirous of gain57 As he contrasts with “a striker” one who is not
quarrelsome, and with him who is covetous of dishonest gain (           ) one who is not covetous,
so with           , him who is addicted to wine, he contrasts one who is gentle or kind. The true
interpretation is that which is given by Chrysostom, that men of a drunken and fierce disposition
ought to be excluded from the office of a bishop. As to the opinion given by Chrysostom, that “a
striker” means one who wounds with the tongue, (that is, who is guilty of slander or of outrageous
reproaches,) I do not admit it. Nor am I moved by his argument, that it will be no great matter, if
the bishop do not strike with the hand; for I think that here he reproves generally that fierceness
which is often found in the military profession, and which is utterly unbecoming in the servants of
Christ. It is well known to what ridicule they expose themselves, who are more ready to strike a
blow with the fist, and — we might even say — to draw the sword, than to settle the disputes of
others by their own sedate behavior. Strikers is therefore the term which he applies to those who
deal much in threatenings, and are of a warlike temperament.
All covetous persons are wickedly desirous of gain;  for, wherever covetousness is, there will
also be that baseness of which the apostle speaks. “He who wishes to become rich wishes also to
become rich soon.” 58 The consequence is, that all covetous persons, even though this is not openly
manifest, apply their minds to dishonest and unlawful gains. Accordingly, he contrasts with this
vice the contempt of money; as there is no other remedy by which it can be corrected. He who will
not patiently and mildly endure poverty will never escape the disease of mean and sordid
covetousness.
Mild and not quarrelsome  He contrasts with “the striker” the man who is “not quarrelsome.”
Mild  — which, we have said, is contrasted with being “addicted to wine” — is the term applied to
him who knows how to bear injuries with a gentle and moderate disposition, who forgives much,
who passes by insults, who neither makes himself be dreaded through harsh severity, nor exacts
with full rigor. Not quarrelsome, one who avoids disputes and quarrels; for, as he elsewhere writes,
56“Some expositors, ancient and modern, take this to be equivalent to ὑβριστὴν  or αὐθάδη ; which is, indeed, much countenanced
by three vices in this clause, standing opposed to the three virtues in the next. But considering that we have at 1 Timothy 3:8  the
expression μή οἴνῳ προσέχοντας  used of the deacons, here at least the physical sense must be included; and, according to every
principle of correct exegesis, it must stand first. In the word πάροινος , the παρὰ  means beyond, denoting excess. So the expression
in Habakkuk 2:5 , ‘he transgresseth by wine.” — Bloomfield.
57 “Ne convoiteux de gain deshonneste .” — “Not covetous of dishonourable gain.”
58 “Dives fieri qui vult, Et cito vult fieri .” — Juvenal.
“the servant of the Lord must not be quarrelsome.”
(2 Timothy 2:24 .)
4 Who ruleth well his own house  Hence it is evident, that Paul does not demand that a bishop
shall be unacquainted within human life, 59 but that he shall be a good and praiseworthy master of
a household; for, whatever may be the admiration commonly entertained for celibacy and a
philosophical life altogether removed from ordinary custom, yet wise and thoughtful men are
convinced by experience, that they who are not ignorant of ordinary life, but are practiced in the
duties of human intercourse, are better trained and adapted for governing the Church. And, therefore,
we ought to observe the reason which is added, ( 1 Timothy 3:5 ,) that he who does not know how
to rule his family, Will not be qualified for governing the Church. Now, this is the case with very
many persons, and indeed with almost all who have been drawn out of an idle and solitary life, 60
as out of dens and caverns; for they are a sort of savages and destitute of humanity.
Who hath his children in subjection with, all reverence  The apostle does not recommend a
clever man, and deeply skilled in domestic matters, but one who has learned to govern a family by
wholesome discipline. He speaks chiefly of children, who may be expected to possess the natural
disposition of their father; and therefore it will be a great disgrace to a bishop, if he has children
who lead a wicked and scandalous life. As to wives, he will speak of them afterwards; but at present,
as I have said, he glances at the most important part of a house.
In the Epistle to Titus, ( Titus 1:6 ,) he shows what is here meant by the word reverence; for,
after having said that the children of a bishop must not be unruly and disobedient, he likewise adds,
“nor liable to the reproach of profligacy or of intemperance.”
He therefore means, in a word, that their morals shall be regulated by all chastity, modesty, and
gravity.
5 And if any one know not how to rule his own house61 This argument, drawn from the less to
the greater, is in itself manifest, that he who is unfit for governing a family will be altogether unable
to govern a people. Besides that it is evident that he is destitute of the virtues necessary for that
purpose, what authority will he have over the people, seeing that his own house makes him
contemptible?
6Not a novice  There being many men of distinguished ability and learning who at that time
were brought to the faith, Paul forbids that such persons shall be admitted to the office of a bishop,
as soon as they have made profession of Christianity. And he shews how great would be the danger;
for it is evident that they are commonly vain, and full of ostentation, and, in consequence of this,
59 “Que I’Evesque ne sache que c’est de vivre au Monde .” — “That the bishop shall not know what it is to live in the world.”
60 “C’est a dire, de la moinerie .” — “That is, from monkhood.”
61 “The house of a believer ought to be like a little church. Heathens, who did not know what a church is, said that a house is
but an image and figure of any public government. A poor man, living with his wife and children and servants, ought to be in
his house like a public governor; but Christians ought to go beyond this. Every father of a family should know that God has
appointed him to that place, that he may know how to govern his wife and children and servants; so that God shall be honored
in the midst of them, and all shall do Him homage. Paul speaks of children; and why? Because he who wishes to discharge his
duty as pastor of a church must be like a father to all believers. Now, let us suppose that a man cannot govern two or three
children which he has in the house. They are his own children, and yet he cannot keep them in subjection; they are deaf to all
that he says to them. How then shall he be able to govern those who are at a distance, and who may be said to be unknown to
him, who even refuse to become wiser, and think that they have no need of being instructed? How shall he be able to keep men
in dread when his own wife is not subject to him? Let us not, therefore, think it strange if it is required in all pastors, that they
be good fathers of a family, and know what it is to govern their own children well. It is not enough to condemn the children, but
we must condemn the fathers, when they permit their children to be worse than others.” — Fr. Ser.
haughtiness and ambition will drive them headlong. What Paul says we experience; for “novices”
have not only impetuous fervor and bold daring, but are also puffed up with foolish confidence, as
if they could fly beyond the clouds. Consequently, it is not without reason that they are excluded
from the honor of a bishopric, till, in process of time their proud temper shall be subdued.
Lest he fall into the condemnation of the devil . The judgment or condemnation of the devil  may
be interpreted in three ways; for some take          (of the devil) to mean Satan; and others, to mean
slanderers. I give the preference to the former view; because it rarely happens that “judgment”
means slander. But again, “the judgment of Satan” may be taken either actively or passively. This
latter sense is adopted by Chrysostom, with whom I willingly agree There is an elegant contrast,
which heightens the enormity of the case, “If he who is placed over the Church of God fall, by his
pride, into the same condemnation with the devil.” Yet I do not reject the active signification,
namely, that he will give the devil occasion for accusing him. But the opinion of Chrysostom is
more correct. 62
7 A good report from those who are without . This appears to be very difficult, that a religious
man should have, as witnesses of his integrity, infidels themselves, who are furiously mad to tell
lies against us. But the apostle means, that, so far as relates to external behavior, even unbelievers
themselves shall be constrained to acknowledge him to be a good man; for, although they
groundlessly slander all the children of God, yet they cannot pronounce him to be a wicked man,
who leads a good and inoffensive life amongst them. Such is that acknowledgment of uprightness
which Paul here describes. The reason is added, —
Lest he fall into reproach and the snare of the devil ; which I explain in this manner: “lest, being
subject to reproach, he begin to be hardened, and abandon himself the more freely to all iniquity,
which is to entangle himself in the snares of the devil.” For what hope is left for him who sins
without any shame?
1 Timothy 3:8-13
8. Diaconos similiter graves, non bilingues,
non multo vino deditos, non turpiter lucri
cupidos:8. Likewise must  the deacons be grave, not
doubletongued, not given to much wine, not
greedy of filthy lucre;
9. Habentes mysterium fidei in pura
conscientia.9. Holding the mystery of the faith in a pure
conscience.
10. Et hi probentur primum; deinde ministrent
ubi irreprehensibiles comperti fuerint.10. And let these also first be proved; then
let them use the office of a deacon, being found
blameless.
62“The words εἰς κρῖμα ἐμπέσὟ τοῦ Διαβόλου  are, by most expositors ancient and modern, understood of falling into the
same condemnation and punishment that the devil fell into through pride, which is supported by the authority of the Pesch. Syr.
Several eminent expositors, from Luther and Erasmus downwards, take τοῦ Διαβόλου  to mean the “calumniator,” or slanderous
enemy of the gospel, the noun being, they say, used generically of those who seek an occasion to calumniate the Christians; but,
as Calvin observes, ‘it rarely happens that “judgment” means slander.’ Moreover, the expression Διάβολος  would thus have to
be taken of just condemnation.” — Bloomfield.
11. Uxores similiter graves, non
calumniatrices, sobrias, fideles in omnibus.11. Even so must their wives be grave, not
slanderers, sober, faithful in all things.
12. Diaconi sint unius uxoris mariti, qui
honeste praesint liberis et domibus suis.12. Let the deacons be the husbands of one
wife, ruling their children and their own houses
well.
13. Nam qui bene ministraverint gradum sibi
bonum ( vel, honestum ) acquirunt, et multam
libertatem in fide, quae est in Christo Iesu.13. For they that have used the office of a
deacon well purchase to themselves a good
degree, and great boldness in the faith which is
in Christ Jesus.
8Likewise the deacons  There is no reason why the diversity of interpretations should lead us
to entertain any doubt. It is certain that time Apostle speaks of those who hold a public office in
the Church; and this refutes the opinion of those who think that domestic servants are here meant.
As to the view given by others, that it denotes presbyters who are inferior to the bishop, that is
without foundation; for it is manifest from other passages, that the term bishop belongs alike to all
presbyters. 63 All are constrained to acknowledge this; and more especially a passage in the first
chapter of the Epistle to Titus proves clearly that this is the meaning. ( Titus 1:7 .) It remains to be
stated that we understand “the deacons” to be those who are mentioned by Luke, ( Acts 6:3 ,) and
who had the charge of the poor. But those who wish to have a more full account of the duties of
deacons may consult the Institutes. 64
Grave, not double-tongued  The first four virtues, with which he wishes them to be endowed,
are of themselves sufficiently well known. Yet it ought to be carefully observed that he advises
them not to be double-tongued; because it is a vice which it is difficult to avoid in the discharge of
that office, and yet ought, more than anything else, to be kept at a distance from it.
9Holding the mystery of faith  As if he had said, “Holding the pure doctrine of religion, and
that from the heart, with a sincere fear of God;” or, “Being well instructed in the faith, so as not to
be ignorant of anything which it is necessary for Christians to know.” He gives to the sum of
Christian doctrine the honorable appellation of a mystery; as indeed God, through the gospel, reveals
to men on earth a wisdom which angels in heaven behold with admiration, and, therefore, we need
not wonder if it exceed human capacity.
Let us therefore remember that it ought to be embraced with the deepest reverence; and because
we could never, by our own strength, ascend to such a height, let us humbly entreat God to impart
it to us by the Spirit of revelation. On the other hand, when we see wicked men either ridicule those
doctrines or have no relish for them, let us acknowledge that it is owing to the grace of God that
those things which have been hidden from others are in our hearts, and before our eyes, as Moses
says, ( Deuteronomy 30:11 .)
Thus he wishes that deacons should be well instructed in “the mystery of faith;” because,
although they do not hold the office of teaching , yet it would be exceedingly absurd to hold a public
office in the Church, while they were ill informed in the Christian faith, more especially since they
must frequently be laid under the necessity of administering advice and consolation, if they do not
63 “Que le nom d’Evesque estoit commun a tons prestres. et qu’entre prestre et evesque il n’y a nulle difference .” — “That
the term bishop was common to all presbyters, and that there is no difference between presbyter and bishop.”
64 See Calvin’s Inst. of the Christian Religion, vol. 3.
choose to neglect their duties. It is added, in a pure conscience, which extends to the whole life,
but chiefly that they may know how to obey God.
10And let those be first tried  He wishes that they who are chosen should not be unknown, but
that their integrity should be ascertained, like that of the bishops. And hence it is evident, that they
are called blameless  who are not stained by any marked vice. Besides, this trial is not for a single
hour, but consists in long experience. In a word, when deacons are to be ordained, the choice must
not fall at random, and without selection, on any that come to hand, but those men are to be chosen
who are approved by their past life in such a manner that, after what may be called full inquiry,
they are ascertained to be well qualified.
11. Likewise the wives  He means the wives both of deacons and of bishops, for they must be
aids to their husbands in their office; which cannot be, unless their behavior excel that of others.
Let the deacons be  Since he mentioned wives, he lays down the same injunction about deacons
as he had formerly down about bishops; namely, that each of them — satisfied within having but
one wife — shall set an example of a chaste and honorable father of a family, and shall keep his
children and his whole house under holy discipline. And this refutes the error of those who
understand this passage as referring to domestic servants. 65
13. For they who have served well  Owing to a practice which came into use one or two centuries
after the death of the apostles, of choosing presbyters from the order of deacons, this passage has
been commonly interpreted as describing elevation to a higher rank, as if the Apostle called to the
honor of being presbyters those who had faithfully discharged the office of a deacon. For my own
part, though I do not deny that the order of deacons might sometimes be the nursery out of which
presbyters were taken, yet I take Paul’s words as meaning, more simply, that they who have
discharged this ministry in a proper manner are worthy of no small honor; because it is not a mean
employment, but a highly honorable office. Now by this expression he intimates how much it is
for the advantage of the Church to have this office discharged by choice men; because the holy
discharge of it procures esteem and reverence.
How absurd is it for Papists to maintain that, in making deacons, they do what Paul enjoins!
First, why do they make deacons but to carry the cup in a procession, and to feed the eyes of the
ignorant with I know not what ridiculous exhibitions? Besides, they do not even observe this; for
not a single deacon has been made, during the last five hundred years, except that, after taking this
step, he may immediately rise to the priesthood. What impudence is it, to boast of elevating to a
higher rank those who have ministered well, when they confer their priesthood on none but those
who have never touched a single part of the former office!
And much liberty in the faith.  With good reason does he add this; for there is nothing that tends
so much to produce liberty as a good conscience and a life free from crime and reproach; as, on
the contrary, timidity must be the lot of those who have a bad conscience. And if they sometimes
make a valiant boast of liberty, yet it is not uniform and constant, nor has it any weight. For this
reason he describes also the kind of liberty. “In the faith,” says he, which is in Christ; that is, that
they may serve — Christ with greater boldness; as, on the other hand, they who have acted basely
in the discharge of their office may be said to have their mouth shut and their hands tied, and are
unfit for doing good; because no reliance — no authority is given to them.
65 “Des serviteurs domestiques, et non pas des diacres de l’Eglise .” — “To domestic servants, and not to the deacons of the
Church.”
1 Timothy 3:14-16
14. Haec tibi scribo, sperans brevi ad te
venire.14. These things write I unto thee, hoping to
come unto thee shortly:
15. Quodsi tardavero, ut videas quomodo
oporteat in domo Dei versari, quae est Ecclesia
Dei viventis, columna et firmamentum veritatis.15. But if I tarry long, that thou mayest know
how thou oughtest to behave thyself in the house
of God, which is the church of the living God,
the pillar and ground of the truth.
16. Et sine controversia magnum est pietatis
mysterium; Deus manifestatus est in carne,16. And without controversy great is the
mystery of godliness: God was manifest in the
justificatus in Spiritu, visus Angelis, praedicatus, flesh, justified in the Spirit, seen of angels,
Gentibus, fidem obtinuit in mundo receptus est
in gloria.preached unto the Gentiles, believed on in the
world, received up into glory.
14These things I write to thee  He holds out to Timothy the hope of his coming, partly in order
to encourage him, and partly in order to repress the insolence of those who grew more haughty on
account of his absence. And yet he does not make any feigned promise to Timothy, or terrify others
through false presence; for he fully expected that he would come, as it is probable that he came, if
he wrote this epistle at the time when he passed through Phrygia, as is related by Luke. ( Acts 18:23 .)
Let us look on this as a proof how great was his anxiety for the churches, when he could not endure
to delay for a short time a remedy for a present evil. Yet immediately afterwards he adds, that he
wrote this epistle for the purpose of informing Timothy, if it should happen that he were delayed
longer than he thought.
15 How thou oughtest to conduct thyself:  By this mode of expression he commends the weight
and dignity of the office; because pastors 66 may be regarded as stewards, to whom God has
committed the charge of governing his house. If any person has the superintendence of a large
house, he labors night and day with earnest solicitude, that nothing may go wrong through his
neglect, or ignorance, or carelessness. If only for men this is done, how much more should it be
done for God?
In the house of God  There are good reasons why God bestows this name on his Church; for not
only has he received us to be his children by the grace of adoption, but he also dwelleth in the midst
of us.
The pillar and foundation of truth  No ordinary enhancement is derived from this appellation.
Could it have been described in loftier language? Is anything more venerable, or more holy, than
that everlasting truth  which embraces both the glory of God and the salvation of men? Were all
the praises of heathen philosophy, with which it has been adorned by its followers, collected into
one heap, what is this in comparison of the dignity of this wisdom, which alone deserves to be
called light and truth, and the instruction of life, and the way, and the kingdom of God? Now it is
preserved on earth by the ministry of the Church alone. What a weight, therefore, rests on the
pastors, who have been entrusted with the charge of so inestimable a treasure! With what impudent
trifling do Papists argue from the words of Paul that all their absurdities ought to be held as oracles
of God, because they are “the pillar of truth,” and therefore cannot err!
66 “Les Evesques, e’est a dire, pasteurs de l’Eglise .” — “Bishops, that is, pastors of the Church.”
First, we ought to see why Paul adorns the Church with so magnificent a title. By holding out
to pastors the greatness of the office, he undoubtedly intended to remind them with what fidelity,
and industry, and reverence they ought to discharge it. How dreadful is the vengeance that awaits
them, if, through their fault, that truth which is the image of the Divine glory, the light of the world,
and the salvation of men, shall be allowed to fall! This consideration ought undoubtedly to lead
pastors to tremble continually, not to deprive them of all energy, but to excite them to greater
vigilance.
Hence we may easily conclude in what sense Paul uses these words. The reason why the Church
is called the “pillar of truth” is, that she defends and spreads it by her agency. God does not himself
come down from heaven to us, nor does he daily send angels to make known his truth; but he
employs pastors, whom he has appointed for that purpose. To express it in a more homely manner,
is not the Church the mother of all believers? Does she not regenerate them by the word of God,
educate and nourish them through their whole life, strengthen, and bring them at length to absolute
perfection? For the same reason, also, she is called “the pillar of truth;” because the office of
administering doctrine, which God hath placed in her hands, is the only instrument of preserving
the truth, that it may not perish from the remembrance of men.
Consequently this commendation relates to the ministry of the word; for if that be removed,
the truth of God will fall to the ground. Not that it is less strong, if it be not supported by the
shoulders of men, as the same Papists idly talk; for it is a shocking blasphemy to say, that the word
of God is uncertain, till it obtain from men what may be called a borrowed certainty. Paul simply
means what he states elsewhere in other words, that since our “faith is by hearing,” there will be
no faith, unless there be preaching. ( Romans 10:17 .) Accordingly in reference to men, the Church
maintains the truth, because by preaching the Church proclaims it, because she keeps it pure and
entire, because she transmits it to posterity. And if the instruction of the gospel be not proclaimed,
if there are no godly ministers who, by their preaching, rescue truth from darkness and forgetfulness,
instantly falsehoods, errors, impostures, superstitions, and every kind of corruption, will reign. In
short, silence in the Church is the banishment and crushing of the truth. Is there anything at all
forced in this exposition?
Having ascertained Paul’s meaning, let us return to the Papists. First, by applying this eulogium
to themselves, they act wickedly; because they deck themselves with borrowed feathers. For,
granting that the Church were elevated above the third heaven, I maintain that it has nothing to do
with them in any manner. Nay, I even turn the whole passage against them; for, if the Church “is
the pillar of truth,” it follows that the Church is not with them, when the truth not only lies buried,
but is shockingly torn, and thrown down, and trampled under foot. Is this either a riddle or a quibble?
Paul does not wish that any society, in which the truth of God does not hold a lofty and conspicuous
place, shall be acknowledged to be a Church; now there is nothing of all this in Popery, but only
ruin and desolation; and, therefore, the true mark of a Church is not found in it. But the mistake
arises from this, that they do not consider, what was of the greatest importance, that the truth of
God is maintained by the pure preaching of the gospel; and that the support of it does not depend
on the faculties or understandings of men, but rests on what is far higher, that is, if it does not depart
from the simple word of God.
16Great is the mystery of godliness  Again, here is another enhancement. That the truth of God
might not, through the ingratitude of men, be less esteemed than it ought, he extols its value, by
stating that
“great is the secret of godliness;”
that is, because it does not treat of mean subjects, but of the revelation of the Son of God,
“in whom are hidden all the treasures of wisdom.” ( Colossians 2:3 .)
From the greatness and importance of such matters, pastors ought to judge of their office, that
they may devote themselves to the discharge of it with greater conscientiousness and deeper
reverence.
God manifested in the flesh  The Vulgate’s translator, by leaving out the name of God, refers
what follows to “the mystery,” but altogether unskillfully and inappropriately, as will clearly be
seen on a bare perusal, though he has Erasmus on his side, who, however, destroys the authority
of his own views, so that it is unnecessary for me to refute it. All the Greek copies undoubtedly
agree in this rendering, “God manifested in the flesh.” But granting that Paul did not express the
name of God, still any one who shall carefully examine the whole matter, will acknowledge that
the name of Christ ought to be supplied. For my own part, I have no hesitation in following the
reading which has been adopted in the Greek copies. In calling the manifestation of Christ, such
as he afterwards describes it, a “great mystery,” the reason is obvious; for this is “the height, depth,
and breadth of wisdom,” which he has elsewhere mentioned, ( Ephesians 3:18 ,) by which all our
senses must unavoidably be overwhelmed.
Let us now examine the various clauses in their order. He could not have spoken more
appropriately about the person of Christ than in these words, “God manifested in the flesh.” First,
we have here an express testimony of both natures; for he declares at the same time that Christ is
true God and true man. Secondly, he points out the distinction between the two natures, when, on
the one hand, he calls him God, and, on the other, expresses his “manifestation, in the flesh.”
Thirdly, he asserts the unity of the person, when he declares, that it is one and the same who was
God, and who has been manifested in the flesh.
Thus, by this single passage, the true and orthodox faith is powerfully defended against Arius,
Marcion, Nestorius, and Eutyches. There is also great emphasis in the contrast of the two words,
God in flesh  How wide is the difference between God and man! And yet in Christ we behold the
infinite glory of God united to our polluted flesh in such a manner that they become one. 67
Justified in the Spirit  As the Son of God “emptied himself,” ( Philippians 2:7 ,) by taking upon
him our flesh, so there was displayed in him a spiritual power which testified that he is God. This
67 “By the word flesh Paul declares that Christ was true man, and that he was clothed with our nature; but, at the same time,
by the word manifested, he shows that there were two natures. We must not imagine a Jesus Christ who is God, and another
Jesus Christ who is man; but we must know that he alone is both God and man. Let us distinguish his two natures, so as to know
that this is the Son of God who is our brother. Now I have said that God permits the ancient heresies, with which the church was
troubled, to be revived in our time, in order to excite us to greater activity. But, on the other hand, let us observe, that the devil
is constrained to do his utmost to overthrow this article of faith, because he sees clearly that it is the foundation of our salvation.
For if we have not that mystery of which Paul speaks, what will become of us? We are all children of Adam, and therefore we
are accursed; we are in the pit of death; in short, we are deadly enemies of God, and thus there is nothing in us but condemnation
and death, till we know that God came to seek us, and that, because we could not rise to him, he came down to us. Till we have
known this, are we not more than wretched? For this reason the Devil wished, as far as he could, to destroy that knowledge, or
rather to mix it with his lies, so as to be perverted. On the other hand, when we see that there is such majesty in God, how shall
we dare to approach unto Him, seeing that we are full of misery? We must therefore come to this union of the majesty of God
with human nature. And thus, in every respect, till we have known the divine majesty that is in Jesus Christ, and our human
weakness which he hath taken upon him, it is impossible for us to have any hope, or to be capable of having recourse to the
goodness of God, or of having the boldness to call upon him, and return to him. In a word, we are entirely shut out from the
heavenly kingdom, the gate is shut against us, and we cannot approach to it in any way whatever.” — Fr. Ser.
passage has received various interpretations; but, for my own part, satisfied with having explained
the Apostle’s real meaning, as far as I understand it, I shall add nothing more. First, justification
here denotes an acknowledgment of divine power; as in Psalm 19:9 , where it is said, that
“the judgments of God are justified,”
that is, are wonderfully and absolutely perfect; 68 and in Psalm 51:5 , that “God is justified,”
meaning that the praise of his justice is illustriously displayed. So also, ( Matthew 11:19 , and Luke
7:35,) when Christ says, that
“Wisdom hath been justified by her children,”
he means that they have given honor unto her; and when Luke ( Luke 7:29 ) relates that the
publicans “justified God,” he means that they acknowledged, with due reverence and gratitude, the
grace of God which they beheld in Christ. What we read here has, therefore, the same meaning as
if Paul had said, that he who appeared clothed with human flesh was, at the same time, declared to
be the Son of God, so that the weakness of the flesh made no diminution of his glory.
Under the word Spirit, he includes everything in Christ that was divine and superior to man;
and he does so for two reasons: First, because he had been humbled in “the flesh,” the Apostle now,
by exhibiting the illustration of his glory, contrasts “the Spirit” with “the flesh.” Secondly, that
glory, worthy of the only-begotten Son of God, which John affirms to have been seen in Christ,
(John 1:14 ,) did not consist in outward display, or in earthly splendor, but was almost wholly
spiritual. The same form of expression is used by him, ( Romans 1:3-4 ,)
“Who was made of the seed of David according to the flesh, and declared by the power of the
Spirit to be the Son of God;”
but with this difference, that in that passage he mentions one kind of manifestation, namely,
the resurrection.
Seen by angels, preached to the Gentiles  All these statements are wonderful and astonishing;
that God deigned to bestow on the Gentiles, who had hitherto wandered in the blindness of their
minds, a revelation of his Son, which had been unknown even to the angels in heaven. When the
Apostle says, that he was “seen by angels,” he means that the sight was such as drew the attention
of angels, both by its novelty and by its excellence. How uncommon and extraordinary the calling
of the Gentiles was, we have stated in the exposition of the second chapter of the Epistle to the
Ephesians. 69 Nor is it wonderful that it was a new spectacle to angels, who, though they knew about
the redemption of mankind, yet did not at first understand the means by which it should be
accomplished, and from whom it must have been concealed, in order that this remarkable display
of the goodness of God might be beheld by them with greater admiration.
Obtained belief in the world  It was above all things astonishing that God made the Gentiles,
who were heathens, and the angels, who held uninterrupted possession of his kingdom, to be equally
partakers of the same revelation. But this great efficacy of the preached gospel was no ordinary
miracle, when Christ, overcoming all obstacles, subdued to the obedience of faith those who seemed
to be altogether incapable of being tamed. Certainly nothing appeared to be less probable — so
68 “When he says, ‘They are justified together,’ the meaning is, They are all righteous from the greatest to the least, without
a single exception. By this commendation he distinguishes the law of God from the doctrines of men; for no blemish or fault
can be found in it, but: it is in all points absolutely perfect.” — Calvin’s Com. the Book of Psalms, vol. 1, p. 323 .
69 Calvin’s Com. On the Ep. To the Galatians and Ephesians, p. 226 .
completely was every entrance closed and shut up. Yet faith vanquished, but by an incredible kind
of victory.
Lastly, he says that he was received into glory ; that is , from this mortal and wretched life.
Accordingly, as in the world, so far as related to the obedience of faith, so also in the person of
Christ, the change was wonderful, when, from the mean condition of a servant, he was exalted to
the right hand of the Father, that every knee may bow to him.