---
layout: calvin-chapter
book_id: james
book_name: 雅各书
chapter: 1
total_chapters: 5
header-img: psalm-bg-mountain.jpg
date: 2026-04-30 20:24
---

CHAPTER 1
James 1:1-4
1 Jacobus, Dei ac Domini Jesu Christi servus,
duodecim tribubus quae in dispersione sunt,
salutem.1 James, a servant of God and of the Lord
Jesus Christ, to the twelve tribes which are
scattered abroad, greeting.
171John Calvin Comm on Catholic Epistles
2 Omne gaudium existimate, fratres mei,
quum in tentationes varias incideritis;2 My brethren, count it all joy when ye fall
into divers temptations;
3 Scientes quod probatio fidei vestrae,
patientiam operatur3 Knowing this, that the trying of your faith
worketh patience.
4 Patientia vero opus perfectum habeat, ut
sitis perfecti et integri, in nullo deficientes.4 But let patience have her perfect work, that
ye may be perfect and entire, wanting nothing.
 
1To the twelve tribes . When the ten tribes were banished, the Assyrian king placed them in
different parts. Afterwards, as it usually happens in the revolutions of kingdoms (such as then took
place,) it is very probable that they moved here and there in all directions. And the Jews had been
scattered almost unto all quarters of the world. He then wrote and exhorted all those whom he could
not personally address, because they had been scattered far and wide. But that he speaks not of the
grace of Christ and of faith in him, the reason seems to be this, because he addressed those who
had already been rightly taught by others; so that they had need, not so much of doctrine, as of the
goads of exhortations. 98
2All joy . The first exhortation is, to bear trials with a cheerful mind. And it was especially
necessary at that time to comfort the Jews, almost overwhelmed as they were with troubles. For
the very name of the nation was so infamous, that they were hated and despised by all people
wherever they went; and their condition as Christians rendered them still more miserable, because
they held their own nation as their most inveterate enemies. At the same time, this consolation was
not so suited to one time, but that it is always useful to believers, whose life is a constant warfare
on earth.
But that we may know more fully what he means, we must doubtless take temptations  or trials
as including all adverse things; and they are so called, because they are the tests of our obedience
to God. He bids the faithful, while exercised with these, to rejoice; and that not only when they fall
into one temptation, but into many, not only of one kind, but of various kinds. And doubtless, since
they serve to mortify our flesh, as the vices of the flesh continually shoot up in us, so they must
necessarily be often repeated. Besides, as we labor under diseases, so it is no wonder that different
remedies are applied to remove them.
The Lord then afflicts us in various ways, because ambition, avarice, envy, gluttony,
intemperance, excessive love of the world, and the innumerable lusts in which we abound, cannot
be cured by the same medicine.
98 The salutation is peculiar; but in the same form with the letter sent to Antioch by the Apostles, (of whom James was one,)
and the church at Jerusalem, Acts 15:23 . It is therefore apostolic, although adopted from a form commonly used by the heathen
writers. See Acts 23:26 . John in John 2:10  and John 2:11  uses the verb χαίρειν  in a similar sense; and it means properly to rejoice.
It being an infinitive, the verb λέγω , to say or to bid, is put before it by John, and is evidently understood here. Hence the
salutation may thus be rendered, —
“James, a servant of God and of the Lord Jesus Christ, bids, (or sends, or wishes) joy to the twelve tribes who are in their
dispersion.”
There had been an eastern  and a western  dispersion, the first at the Assyrian and Babylonian captivity, and the second
during the predominancy of the Grecian power, which commenced with Alexander the Great. As this epistle was written in
Greek, it was no doubt intended more especially for those of the latter dispersion. But the benefit of the eastern dispersion was
soon consulted, as the very first version of the New Testament was made into this language, that is, the Syriac; and this was
done at the beginning of the second century.
172John Calvin Comm on Catholic Epistles
When he bids us to count it all joy , it is the same as though he had said, that temptations ought
to be so deemed as gain, as to be regarded as occasions of joy. He means, in short, that there is
nothing in afflictions which ought to disturb our joy. And thus, he not only commands us to bear
adversities calmly, and with an even mind, but shews us that this is a reason why the faithful should
rejoice when pressed down by them.
It is, indeed, certain, that all the senses of our nature are so formed, that every trial produces in
us grief and sorrow; and no one of us can so far divest himself of his nature as not to grieve and be
sorrowful whenever he feels any evil. But this does not prevent the children of God to rise, by the
guidance of the Spirit, above the sorrow of the flesh. Hence it is, that in the midst of trouble they
cease not to rejoice.
3Knowing this, that the trying . We now see why he called adversities trials or temptations ,
even because they serve to try our faith. And there is here a reason given to confirm the last sentence.
For it might, on the other hand, be objected, “How comes it, that we judge that sweet which to the
sense is bitter?” He then shews by the effect that we ought to rejoice in afflictions, because they
produce fruit that ought to be highly valued, even patience. If God then provides for our salvation,
he affords us an occasion of rejoicing. Peter uses a similar argument at the beginning of his first
Epistle, “That the trial of your faith, more precious than gold, may be,” etc. [ 1Peter 1:7 .] We certainly
dread diseases, and want, and exile, and prison, and reproach, and death, because we regard them
as evils; but when we understand that they are turned through God’s kindness unto helps and aids
to our salvation, it is ingratitude to murmur, and not willingly to submit to be thus paternally dealt
with.
Paul says, in Romans 5:3 , that we are to glory in tribulations; and James says here, that we are
to rejoice. “We glory,” says Paul, “in tribulations, knowing that tribulation worketh patience.” What
immediately follows seems contrary to the words of James; for he mentions probation in the third
place, as the effect of patience, which is here put first as though it were the cause. But the solution
is obvious; the word there has an active, but here a passive meaning. Probation or trial is said by
James to produce patience; for were not God to try us, but leave us free from trouble, there would
be no patience, which is no other thing than fortitude of mind in bearing evils. But Paul means, that
while by enduring we conquer evils, we experience how much God’s help avails in necessities; for
then the truth of God is as it were in reality manifested to us. Hence it comes that we dare to entertain
more hope as to futurity; for the truth of God, known by experience, is more fully believed by us.
Hence Paul teaches that by such a probation, that is, by such an experience of divine grace, hope
is produced, not that hope then only begins, but that it increases and is confirmed. But both mean,
that tribulation is the means by which patience is produced.
Moreover, the minds of men are not so formed by nature, that affliction of itself produces
patience in them. But Paul and Peter regard not so much the nature of men as the providence of
God through which it comes, that the faithful learn patience from troubles; for the ungodly are
thereby more and more provoked to madness, as the example of Pharaoh proves. 99
4But let patience have her perfect work.  As boldness and courage often appear in us and soon
fail, he therefore requires perseverance. “Real patience,” he says, “is that which endures to the
end.” For work  here means the effort not only to overcome in one contest, but to persevere through
99The word used by James is δοχίμιον , trial, the act of testing, and by Paul δοχιμὴ,  the result of testing, experience. James
speaks of probation, and Paul of the experience gained thereby.
173John Calvin Comm on Catholic Epistles
life. His perfection may also he referred to the sincerity of the soul, that men ought willingly and
not feignedly to submit to God; but as the word work  is added, I prefer to explain it of constancy.
For there are many, as we have said, who shew at first an heroic greatness, and shortly after grow
weary and faint. He therefore bids those who would be perfect  and entire , 100 to persevere to the
end. But what he means by these two words, he afterwards explains of those who fail not, or become
not wearied: for they, who being overcome as to patience, be broken down, must, by degrees, be
necessarily weakened, and at length wholly fail.
James 1:5-8
5 Porro si quis autem vestrum destituitur
sapientia, postulet a Deo, qui dat omnibus
simpliciter, nec exprobrat; et dabitur ei.5 If any of you lack wisdom, let him ask of
God, that giveth to all men liberally, and
upbraideth not; and it shall be given him.
6 Postulet autem in fide, nihil haesitans; nam
qui haesitat similis est fluctui maris, qui a vento
agitur et circumfertur.6 But let him ask in faith, nothing wavering.
For he that wavereth is like a wave of the sea
driven with the wind and tossed.
7 non ergo existimet homo ille quod sit
quicquam accepturus a Domino.7 For let not that man think that he shall
receive any thing of the Lord.
8 Vir duplici animo, instabilis est in omnibus
viis suis.8 A double minded man is unstable in all his
ways.
 
5If any of you lack wisdom.  As our reason, and all our feelings are averse to the thought that
we can be happy in the midst of evils, he bids us to ask of the Lord to give us wisdom. For wisdom
here, I confine to the subject of the passage, as though he had said, “If this doctrine is higher than
what your minds can reach to, ask of the Lord to illuminate you by his Spirit; for as this consolation
alone is sufficient to mitigate all the bitterness of evils, that what is grievous to the flesh is salutary
to us; so we must necessarily be overcome with impatience, except we be sustained by this kind
of comfort.” Since we see that the Lord does not so require from us what is above our strength, but
that he is ready to help us, provided we ask, let us, therefore, learn, whenever he commands anything,
to ask from him the power to perform it.
Though in this place to be wise is to submit to God in the endurance of evils, under a due
conviction that he so orders all things as to promote our salvation; yet the sentence may be generally
applied to every branch of right knowledge.
But why does he say If any one,  as though all of them did not want wisdom. To this I answer,
that all are by nature without it; but that some are gifted with the spirit of wisdom, while others are
without it. As, then, all had not made such progress as to rejoice in affliction, but few there were
to whom this had been given, James, therefore, referred to such cases; and he reminded those who
100“Perfect, τέλειοι ,” fully grown, mature; “entire, ὁλόχληζοι, ” complete, no part wanting. The first refers to the maturity of
grace; and the second to its completeness, no grace being wanting. They were to be like men full grown, and not maimed or
mutilated, but having all their members complete.
174John Calvin Comm on Catholic Epistles
were not as yet fully convinced that by the cross their salvation was promoted by the Lord, that
they were to ask to be endued with wisdom. And yet there is no doubt, but that necessity reminds
us all to ask the same thing; for he who has made the greatest progress, is yet far off from the goal.
But to ask an increase of wisdom is another thing than to ask for it at first.
When he bids us to ask of the Lord,  he intimates, that he alone can heal our diseases and relieve
our wants.
That giveth to all men liberally . By all, he means those who ask; for they who seek no remedy
for their wants, deserve to pine away in them. However, this universal declaration, by which every
one of us is invited to ask, without exception, is very important; hence no man ought to deprive
himself of so great a privilege.
To the same purpose is the promise which immediately follows; for as by this command he
shews what is the duty of every one, so he affirms that they would not do in vain what he commands;
according to what is said by Christ,
“Knock, and it shall be opened.”
(Matthew 7:7 ; Luke 11:9 .)
The word liberally , or freely , denotes promptitude in giving. So Paul, in Romans 12:8 , requires
simplicity in deacons. And in 2 Corinthians 8  and 2 Corinthians 9 , when speaking of charity or
love, he repeats the same word several times. The meaning, then, is, that God is so inclined and
ready to give, that he rejects none, or haughtily puts them off, being not like the niggardly and
grasping, who either sparingly, as with a closed hand, give but little, or give only a part of what
they were about to give, or long debate with themselves whether to give or not. 101
And upbraideth not.  This is added, lest any one should fear to come too often to God. Those
who are the most liberal among men, when any one asks often to be helped, mention their formal
acts of kindness, and thus excuse themselves for the future. Hence, a mortal man, however
open-handed he may be, we are ashamed to weary by asking too often. But James reminds us, that
there is nothing like this in God; for he is ready ever to add new blessings to former ones, without
any end or limitation.
6 But let him ask in faith . He shews here, first the right way of praying; for as we cannot pray
without the word, as it were, leading the way, so we must believe before we pray; for we testify by
prayer, that we hope to obtain from God the grace which he has promised. Thus every one who has
no faith in the promises, prays dissemblingly. Hence, also, we learn what is true faith; for James,
after having bidden us to ask in faith, adds this explanation, nothing wavering , or, doubting nothing .
Then faith is that which relies on God’s promises, and makes us sure of obtaining what we ask. It
hence follows, that it is connected with confidence and certainty as to God’s love towards us. The
verb διακρίνεσθαι , which he uses, means properly to inquire into both sides of a question, after the
manner of pleaders. He would have us then to be so convinced of what God has once promised, as
not to admit a doubt whether he shall be heard or not.
He that wavereth , or doubteth . By this similitude he strikingly expresses how God punishes the
unbelief of those who doubt his promises; for, by their own restlessness, they torment themselves
101The literal meaning of ἁπλῶς  is simply without any mixture; the noun, ἁπλότης , is used in the sense of sincerity, which
has no mixture of hypocrisy or fraud, ( 2 Corinthians 1:12 .) and in the sense of liberality, or disposition free from what is sordid
or parsimonious, having no mixture of niggardliness, ( 2 Corinthians 8:2 .) This latter is evidently the meaning here, so that
“liberally,” according to our version, is the best word.
175John Calvin Comm on Catholic Epistles
inwardly; for there is never any calmness for our souls, except they recumb on the truth of God.
He, at length, concludes, that such are unworthy to receive anything from God.
This is a remarkable passage, fitted to disprove that impious dogma which is counted as an
oracle under the whole Papacy, that is, that we ought to pray doubtingly, and with uncertainty as
to our success. This principle, then, we hold, that our prayers are not heard by the Lord, except
when we have a confidence that we shall obtain. It cannot indeed be otherwise, but that through
the infirmity of our flesh we must be tossed by various temptations, which are like engines employed
to shake our confidence; so that no one is found who does not vacillate and tremble according to
the feeling of his flesh; but temptations of this kind are at length to be overcome by faith. The case
is the same as with a tree, which has struck firm roots; it shakes, indeed, through the blowing of
the wind, but is not rooted up; on the contrary, it remains firm in its own place.
8A double-minded man , or, a man of a double mind . This sentence may be read by itself, as
he speaks generally of hypocrites. It seems, however, to me to be rather the conclusion of the
preceding doctrine; and thus there is an implied contrast between the simplicity or liberality of
God, mentioned before, and the double-mindedness of man; for as God gives to us with a stretched
out hand, so it behooves us in our turn to open the bosom of our heart. He then says that the
unbelieving, who have tortuous recesses, are unstable ; because they are never firm or fixed, but at
one time they swell with the confidence of the flesh, at another they sink into the depth of despair.
102
James 1:9-11
9 Porro glorietur frater humilis in sublimate
sua;9 Let the brother of low degree rejoice in that
he is exalted:
10 Dives autem in humilitate sua, quia
tanquam flos herbae prateteribit.10 But the rich, in that he is made low:
because as the flower of the grass he shall pass
away.
11 Nam sol exortus est cum aestu, et exarescit
herba, et flos ejus cecidit, et decor aspectus ejus11 For the sun is no sooner risen with a
burning heat, but it withereth the grass, and the
periit; sic et dives in suis viis ( vel, copiis )
marcescet.flower thereof falleth, and the grace of the fashion
of it perisheth: so also shall the rich man fade
away in his ways.
 
9Let the brother of low degree . As Paul, exhorting servants submissively to bear their lot, sets
before them this consolation, that they were the free-men of God, having been set free by his grace
from the most miserable bondage of Satan, and reminds them, though free, yet to remember that
they were the servants of God; so here James in the same manner bids the lowly to glory in this,
that they had been adopted by the Lord as his children; and the rich, because they had been brought
102“The double-minded,” or the man with two souls, δίψυχος , means here no doubt the man who hesitates between faith and
unbelief, because faith is the subject of the passage. When again used, in James 4:8 , it means a hesitation between God and the
world.
176John Calvin Comm on Catholic Epistles
down into the same condition, the world’s vanity having been made evident to them. Thus the first
thing he would have to do is to be content with their humble and low state; and he forbids the rich
to be proud. Since it is incomparably the greatest dignity to be introduced into the company of
angels, nay, to be made the associates of Christ, he who estimates this favor of God aright, will
regard all other things as worthless. Then neither poverty, nor contempt, nor nakedness, nor famine
nor thirst, will make his mind so anxious, but that he will sustain himself with this consolation.
“Since the Lord has conferred on me the principal thing, it behooves me patiently to bear the loss
of other things, which are inferior.”
Behold, how a lowly brother ought to glory in his elevation or exaltation; for if he be accepted
of God, he has sufficient consolation in his adoption alone, so as not to grieve unduly for a less
prosperous state of life.
10 But the rich, in that he is made low , or, in his lowness . He has mentioned the particular for
the general; for this admonition pertains to all those who excel in honor; or in dignity, or in any
other external thing. He bids them to glory in their lowness or littleness, in order to repress the
haughtiness of those who are usually inflated with prosperity. But he calls it lowness , because the
manifested kingdom of God ought to lead us to despise the world, as we know that all the things
we previously greatly admired, are either nothing or very little things. For Christ, who is not a
teacher except of babes, checks by his doctrine all the haughtiness of the flesh. Lest, then, the vain
joy of the world should captivate the rich, they ought to habituate themselves to glory in the casting
down of their carnal excellency. 103
As the flower of the grass . Were any one to say that James alludes to the words of Isaiah, I
would not much object; but I cannot allow that he quotes the testimony of the Prophet, who speaks
not only of the things of this life and the fading character of the world, but of the whole man, both
body and soul; [ Isaiah 40:6-8 ;] but here what is spoken of is the pomp of wealth or of riches. And
the meaning is, that glorying in riches is foolish and preposterous, because they pass away in a
moment. The philosophers teach the same thing; but the song is sung to the deaf, until the ears are
opened by the Lord to hear the truth concerning the eternity of the celestial kingdom. Hence he
mentions brother ; intimating that there is no place for this truth, until we are admitted into the order
of God’s children.
Though the received reading is ἐν ταῖς πορείαις , yet I agree with Erasmus, and read the last
word, πορίαις , without the diphthong “in his riches,” or, with his riches; and the latter I prefer. 104
James 1:12-15
12 Beatus vir qui suffert temptationem; quod
quum probatus fuerit, accipiet coronam vitae,
quam promisit Deus diligentibus ipsum.12 Blessed is the man that endureth
temptation: for when he is tried, he shall receive
103 The opinion of Macknight  and some others, that the reference is to the lowness to which the rich were reduced by persecution,
does not comport with the passage, for the Apostle afterwards speaks of the shortness of man’s life and its uncertainty, and not
of the fading nature of riches, which would have been most suitable, had he in view to comfort the rich at the loss of property.
The Christian state was “lowness” according to the estimation of the world.
104 The received text is regarded as the best reading; the other is found in very few copies.
177John Calvin Comm on Catholic Epistles
the crown of life, which the Lord hath promised
to them that love him.
13 Nemo quum tentatur dicat, a Deo tentor;
Deus enim nec tentari malis potest, nec quenquam
tentat.13 Let no man say when he is tempted, I am
tempted of God: for God cannot be tempted with
evil, neither tempteth he any man:
14 Sed unusquisque tentatur, dum a sua
concupiscentia abstrahitur, et inescatur.14 But every man is tempted, when he is
drawn away of his own lust, and enticed.
15 Postquam antum concupiscentia
conceperit, parit peccatum vero perfectum generat
mortem.15 Then when lust hath conceived, it bringeth
forth sin: and sin, when it is finished, bringeth
forth death.
 
12Blessed is the man . After having applied consolation, he moderated the sorrow of those who
were severely handled in this world, and again humbled the arrogance of the great. He now draws
this conclusion, that they are happy who magnanimously endure troubles and other trials, so as to
rise above them. The word temptation may indeed be otherwise understood, even for the stings of
lusts which annoy the soul within; but which is here commended, as I think, is fortitude of mind
in enduring adversities. It is, however, a paradox, that they are not happy to whom all things come
according to their wishes, but such as are not overcome with evils.
For when he is tried . He gives a reason for the preceding sentence; for the crown follows the
contest. If, then, it be our chief happiness to be crowned in the kingdom of God, it follows, that the
contests with which the Lord tries us, are aids and helps to our happiness. Thus the argument is
from the end or the effect: hence we conclude, that the faithful are harassed by so many evils for
this purpose, that their piety and obedience may be made manifest, and that they may be thus at
length prepared to receive the crown of life.
But they reason absurdly who hence infer that we by fighting merit the crown; for since God
has gratuitously appointed it for us, our fighting only renders us fit to receive it.
He adds, that it is promised  to those who love God. By speaking thus, he means not that the
love of man is the cause of obtaining the crown, (for God anticipates us by his gratuitous love;) but
he only intimates that the elect who love him are alone approved by God. He then reminds us that
the conquerors of all temptations are those who love God, and that we fail not in courage when we
are tried, for no other cause than because the love of the world prevails in us.
13Let no man, when he is tempted . Here, no doubt, he speaks of another kind of temptation. It
is abundantly evident that the external temptations, hitherto mentioned, are sent to us by God. In
this way God tempted Abraham, ( Genesis 22:1 ,) and daily tempts us, that is, he tries us as to what
are we by laying before us an occasion by which our hearts are made known. But to draw out what
is hid in our hearts is a far different thing from inwardly alluring our hearts by wicked lusts.
He then treats here of inward temptations which are nothing else than the inordinate desires
which entice to sin. He justly denies that God is the author of these, because they flow from the
corruption of our nature.
This warning is very necessary, for nothing is more common among men than to transfer to
another the blame of the evils they commit; and they then especially seem to free themselves, when
they ascribe it to God himself. This kind of evasion we constantly imitate, delivered down to us as
178John Calvin Comm on Catholic Epistles
it is from the first man. For this reason James calls us to confess our own guilt, and not to implicate
God, as though he compelled us to sin.
But the whole doctrine of scripture seems to be inconsistent with this passage; for it teaches us
that men are blinded by God, are given up to a reprobate mind, and delivered over to filthy and
shameful lusts. To this I answer, that probably James was induced to deny that we are tempted by
God by this reason, because the ungodly, in order to form an excuse, armed themselves with
testimonies of Scripture. But there are two things to be noticed here: when Scripture ascribes
blindness or hardness of heart to God, it does not assign to him the beginning of this blindness, nor
does it make him the author of sin, so as to ascribe to him the blame: and on these two things only
does James dwell.
Scripture asserts that the reprobate are delivered up to depraved lusts; but is it because the Lord
depraves or corrupts their hearts? By no means; for their hearts are subjected to depraved lusts,
because they are already corrupt and vicious. But since God blinds or hardens, is he not the author
or minister of evil? Nay, but in this manner he punishes sins, and renders a just reward to the
ungodly, who have refused to be ruled by his Spirit. ( Romans 1:26 .) It hence follows that the origin
of sin is not in God, and no blame can be imputed to him as though he took pleasure in evils.
(Genesis 6:6 .)
The meaning is, that man in vain evades, who attempts to cast the blame of his vices on God,
because every evil proceeds from no other fountain than from the wicked lust of man. And the fact
really is, that we are not otherwise led astray, except that every one has his own inclination as his
leader and impeller. But that God tempts no one, he proves by this, because he is not tempted with
evils105 For it is the devil who allures us to sin, and for this reason, because he wholly burns with
the mad lust of sinning. But God does not desire what is evil: he is not, therefore, the author of
doing evil in us.
14When he is drawn away by his own lust.  As the inclination and excitement to sin are inward,
in vain does the sinner seek an cause from an external impulse. At the same time these two effects
of lust ought to be noticed — that it ensnares us by its allurements, and that it does us away; each
of which is sufficient to render us guilty. 106
15Then when lust hath conceived . He first calls that lust which is not any kind of evil affection
or desire, but that which is the fountain of all evil affections; by which, as he shews, are conceived
vicious broods, which at length break forth into sins. It seems, however, improper, and not according
to the usage of Scripture, to restrict the word sin to outward works, as though indeed lust itself were
not a sin, and as though corrupt desires, remaining closed up within and suppressed, were not so
105 Literally, “untemptable by evils,” that is, not capable of being tempted or seduced by evils, by things wicked and sinful.
He is so pure, that he is not influenced by any evil propensities, that he is not subject to any evil suggestions. It hence follows
that he tempts or seduces no man to what is sinful. Being himself unassailable by evils, he cannot seduce others to what is evil.
As God cannot be tempted to do what is sinful, he cannot possibly tempt others to sin. The words may thus be rendered, —
 
13. “Let no one, when seduced, say, ‘By God I am seduced;’ for God is not capable of being seduced by evils, and he
himself seduceth no one.”
106 The words are very striking, — “But every one is tempted (or, seduced) when, by his own lust, he is drawn away, (that is,
from what is good,) and is caught by a bait (or, ensnared.)”
He is in the first drawn off from the line of duty, and then he is caught by something that is pleasing and plausible, but like
the bait, it has in it a deadly hook.
179John Calvin Comm on Catholic Epistles
many sins. But as the use of a word is various, there is nothing unreasonable if it be taken here, as
in many other places, for actual sin.
And the Papists ignorantly lay hold on this passage, and seek to prove from it that vicious, yea,
filthy, wicked, and the most abominable lusts are not sins, provided there is no assent; for James
does not shew when sin begins to be born, so as to be sin, and so accounted by God, but when it
breaks forth. For he proceeds gradually and shews that the consummation of sin is eternal death,
and that sin arises from depraved desires, and that these depraved desires or affections have their
root in lust. It hence follows that men gather fruit in eternal perdition, and fruit which they have
procured for themselves.
By perfected sin , therefore, I understand, not any one act of sin perpetrated, but the completed
course of sinning. For though death is merited by every sin whatever, yet it is said to be the reward
of an ungodly and wicked life. Hence is the dotage of those confuted who conclude from these
words, that sin is not mortal until it breaks forth, as they say, into an external act. Nor is this what
James treats of; but his object was only this, to teach that there is in us the root of our own
destruction.
James 1:16-18
16 Ne erretis, fratres mei dilecti: 16 Do not err, my beloved brethren.
17 Omnis donatio bona et omne donum
perfectum desursum est, descendens a Patre17 Every good gift and every perfect gift is
from above, and cometh down from the Father
luminum; apud quem non est transmutatio, aut
conversionis obumbratio.of lights, with whom is no variableness, neither
shadow of turning.
18 Is sua voluntate genuit nos veritatis, ut
essemus primitiae quaedam suaram creaturarum.18 Of his own will begat he us with the word
of truth, that we should be a kind of firstfruits of
his creatures.
 
16Do not err . This is an argument from what is opposite; for as God is the author of all good,
it is absurd to suppose him to be the author of evil. To do good is what properly belongs to him,
and according to his nature; and from him all good things come to us. Then, whatever evil he does,
is not agreeable to his nature. But as it sometimes happens, that he who quits himself well through
life, yet in some things fails, he meets this doubt by denying that God is mutable like men. But if
God is in all things and always like himself, it hence follows that well-doing is his perpetual work.
This reasoning is far different from that of Plato, who maintained that no calamities are sent
on men by God, because he is good; for though it is just that the crimes of men should be punished
by God, yet it is not right, with regard to him, to regard among evils that punishment which he
justly inflicts. Plato, indeed, was ignorant; but James, leaving to God his right and office of punishing,
only removes blame from him. This passage teaches us, that we ought to be so affected by God’s
innumerable blessings, which we daily receive from his hand, as to think of nothing but of his glory;
and that we should abhor whatever comes to our mind, or is suggested by others, which is not
compatible with his praise.
180John Calvin Comm on Catholic Epistles
God is called the Father of lights , as possessing all excellency and the highest dignity. And
when he immediately adds, that there is in him no shadow of turning , he continues the metaphor;
so that we may not measure the brightness of God by the irradiation of the sun which appears to
us. 107
18Of his own will . He now brings forward a special proof of the goodness of God which he
had mentioned, even that he has regenerated us unto eternal life. This invaluable benefit every one
of the faithful feels in himself. Then the goodness of God, when known by experience, ought to
remove from them all a contrary opinion respecting him.
When he says that God of his own will , or spontaneously, hath begotten us , he intimates that
he was induced by no other reason, as the will and counsel of God are often set in opposition to
the merits of men. What great thing, indeed, would it have been to say that God was not constrained
to do this? But he impresses something more, that God according to his own goodwill hath begotten
us, and has been thus a cause to himself. It hence follows that it is natural to God to do good.
But this passage teaches us, that as our election before the foundation of the world was gratuitous,
so we are illuminated by the grace of God alone as to the knowledge of the truth, so that our calling
corresponds with our election. The Scripture shews that we have been gratuitously adopted by God
before we were born. But James expresses here something more, that we obtain the right of adoption,
because God does also call us gratuitously. ( Ephesians 1:4, 5 .) Farther, we hence learn, that it is
the peculiar office of God spiritually to regenerate us; for that the same thing is sometimes ascribed
to the ministers of the gospel, means no other thing than this, that God acts through them; and it
happens indeed through them, but he nevertheless alone doeth the work.
The word begotten  means that we become new men, so that we put off our former nature when
we are effectually called by God. He adds how God begets us, even by the word of truth , so that
we may know that we cannot enter the kingdom of God by any other door.
That we should be a kind of firstfruits of his creatures . The word τινὰ, “some,” has the meaning
of likeness, as though he had said, that we are in a manner firstfruits. But this ought not to be
restricted to a few of the faithful; but it belongs to all in common. For as man excels among all
creatures, so the Lord elects some from the whole mass and separates them as a holy offering, to
himself. 108 It is no common nobility into which God extols his own children. Then justly are they
said to be excellent as firstfruits, when God’s image is renewed in them.
107 This verse must be taken in connection with what as gone before. When he mentions “every good gift,” it is in opposition
to the evil of which he says God is not the author. See Matthew 7:11 . And “every perfect free-gift,” as δώρημα  means, has a
reference to the correction of the evil which arises from man himself. And he calls free-gift perfect, because it has no mixture
of evil, what he throughout denies that God is the author of. Then the latter part of the verse bears a correspondence with the
first. He calls God “the Father of Lights.” Light in the language of scripture means especially two things, the light of truth, divine
knowledge and holiness. God is the father, the parent, the origin, the source of these lights. Hence from him descends every
good, useful, necessary gift, to deliver men from evil, from ignorance and delusion, and every perfect free-gift to free men from
their evil lusts, and to render them holy and happy. And to shew that God is ever the same, he adds, “with whom there is no
variableness or the shadow (or shade, of the slightest appearance) of a change;” that is, who never varies in his dealings with
men, and shews no symptom of any change, being the author and giver of all good, and the author of no evil, that is, of no sin.
108 The firstfruits being a part and a pledge of the coming harvest, to retain the metaphor, we must regard “creatures” here as
including all the saved in future ages. Hence their opinion is to be preferred, who regard the first converts, who were Jews, as
the firstfruits.
181John Calvin Comm on Catholic Epistles
James 1:19-21
19 Itaque, fratres mei dilecti, sit omnis homo
celer ad audiendum, tardus autem ad loquendum,
tardus ad iram:19 Wherefore, my beloved brethren, let every
man be swift to hear, slow to speak, slow to
wrath:
20 Ira enim hominus justitiam Dei non
operatur.20 For the wrath of man worketh not the
righteousness of God.
21 Quapropter deposita omni inmunditie, et
redundantia malitiae, cum mansuetudine suscipite21 Wherefore lay apart all filthiness and
superfluity of naughtiness, and receive with
insitum sermonem qui potest servare animas
vestras.meekness the engrafted word, which is able to
save your souls.
 
19 Let every man . Were this a general sentence, the inference would be farfetched; but as he
immediately adds a sentence respecting the word of truth suitable to the last verse, I doubt not but
that he accommodates this exhortation peculiarly to the subject in hand. Having then set before us
the goodness of God, he shews how it becomes us to be prepared to receive the blessing which he
exhibits towards us. And this doctrine is very useful, for spiritual generation is not a work of one
moment. Since some remnants of the old man ever abide in us, we must necessarily be through life
renewed, until the flesh be abolished; for either our perverseness, or arrogance, or sloth, is a great
impediment to God in perfecting in us his work. Hence, when James would have us to be swift to
hear, he commends promptitude, as though he had said, “When God so freely and kindly presents
himself to you, you also ought to render yourselves teachable, lest your slowness should cause him
to desist from speaking.”
But inasmuch as we do not calmly hear God speaking to us, when we seem to ourselves to be
very wise, but by our haste interrupt him when addressing us, the Apostle requires us to be silent,
to be slow to speak . And, doubtless, no one can be a true disciple of God, except he hears him in
silence. He does not, however, require the silence of the Pythagorean school, so that it should not
be right to inquire whenever we desire to learn what is necessary to be known; but he would only
have us to correct and restrain our forwardness, that we may not, as it commonly happens,
unseasonably interrupt God, and that as long as he opens his sacred mouth, we may open to him
our hearts and our ears, and not prevent him to speak.
Slow to wrath . Wrath also, I think, is condemned with regard to the hearing which God demands
to be given to him, as though making a tumult it disturbed and impeded him, for God cannot be
heard except when the mind is calm and sedate. Hence, he adds, that as long as wrath bears rule
there is no place for the righteousness of God. In short, except the heat of contention be banished,
we shall never observe towards God that calm silence of which he has just spoken.
21Wherefore lay apart . He concludes by saying how the word of life is to be received. And
first, indeed, he intimates that it cannot be rightly received except it be implanted, or strike roots
in us. For the expression, to receive the implanted word , ought to be thus explained, “to receive it,
that it may be really implanted.” For he alludes to seed often sown on and ground, and not received
into the moist bosom of the earth; or to plants, which being cast on the ground, or laid on dead
wood, soon wither. He then requires that it should be a living implanting, by which the word
becomes as it were united with our heart.
182John Calvin Comm on Catholic Epistles
He at the same time shews the way and manner of this reception, even with meekness . By this
word he means humility and the readiness of a mind disposed to learn, such as Isaiah describes
when he says,
“On whom does my Spirit rest, except on the humble and meek?” ( Isaiah 57:15 .)
Hence it is, that so far profit in the school of God, because hardly one in a hundred renounces
the stubbornness of his own spirit, and gently submits to God; but almost all are conceited and
refractory. But if we desire to be the living plantation of God, we must subdue our proud hearts
and be humble, and labor to become like lambs, so as to suffer ourselves to be ruled and guided by
our Shepherd.
But as men are never thus tamed, so as to have a calm and meek heart, except they are purged
from depraved affections, so he bids us to lay aside uncleanness and redundancy of wickedness .
And as James borrowed a comparison from agriculture, it was necessary for him to observe this
order, to begin by rooting up noxious weeds. And since he addressed all, we may hence conclude
that these are the innate evils of our nature, and that they cleave to us all; yea, since he addresses
the faithful, he shews that we are never wholly cleansed from them in this life, but that they are
continually sprouting up, and therefore he requires that care should be constantly taken to eradicate
them. As the word of God is especially a holy thing; to be fitted to receive it, we must put off the
filthy things by which we have been polluted.
Under the word κακία , he comprehends hypocrisy and obstinacy as well as unlawful desires
or lusts. Not satisfied with specifying the seat of wickedness as being in the soul of man, he teaches
us that so abounding is the wickedness that dwells there, that it overflows, or that it rises up as it
were into a heap; and doubtless, whosoever will well examine himself will find that there is within
him an immense chaos of evils. 109
Which is able to save . It is a high eulogy on heavenly truth, that we obtain through it a sure
salvation; and this is added, that we may learn to seek and love and magnify the word as a treasure
that is incomparable. It is then a sharp goad to chastise our idleness, when he says that the word
which we are wont to hear so negligently, is the means of our salvation, though for this purpose
the power of saving is not ascribed to the word, as if salvation is conveyed by the external sound
of the word, or as if the office of saving is taken away from God and transferred elsewhere; for
James speaks of the word which by faith penetrates into the hearts of men, and only intimates that
God, the author of salvation, conveys it by his Gospel.
James 1:22-27
109What renders this passage unsatisfactory is the meaning given to περισσεία , rendered by some “superfluity,” and by others
“redundancy.” The verb περισσεύω  means not only to abound, but also to be a residue, to remain, to be a remnant. See Matthew
14:20 ; Luke 9:17 . And its derivative περίσσευμα  is used in the sense of a remnant or a remainder, Mark 8:8 ; and this very word
is used in the Sept. , for     which means a residue, a remnant,  or what remains, Ezekiel 6:8 . Let it have this meaning here, and
the sense will not only be clear, but very striking. James was addressing those who were Christians; and he exhorted them to
throw away every uncleanness and remnant of wickedness, or evil, as the word κακία  more properly means. See Acts 8:22 ; 1
Peter 2:16
“Every uncleanness,” or filthiness, means every kind of uncleanness arising from lustful and carnal indulgences; and the
“remnant of wickedness,” in thought and in deed, most suitably follows.
183John Calvin Comm on Catholic Epistles
22 Estote factores sermones, et non auditores
solum, fallentes vos ipsos.22 But be ye doers of the word, and not
hearers only, deceiving your own selves.
23 Nam si quis auditor est sermones, et non
factor, hic similis est homini consideranti faciem
nativitatis suae in speculo.23 For if any be a hearer of the word, and not
a doer, he is like unto a man beholding his natural
face in a glass:
24 Consideravit enim seipsum, et abiit, et
protinus oblitus est qualis sit.24 For he beholdeth himself, and goeth his
way, and straightway forgetteth what manner of
man he was.
25 Qui vero intuitus fuerit in legem
perfectam, quae est libertatis, et permanserit, hic25 But whoso looketh into the perfect law of
liberty, and continueth therein , he being not a
non auditor obliviosus, sed factor operis, beatus
in opere suo erit.forgetful hearer, but a doer of the work, this man
shall be blessed in his deed.
26 Si quis videtur religiosus esse inter vos,
nec refraenat linguam suam, sed decipits cor
suum, hujus inanus est religio.26 If any man among you seem to be
religious, and bridleth not his tongue, but
deceiveth his own heart, this man’s religion is
vain.
27 Religio pura et impolluta coram Deo et
Patre, haec est, Visitare pupillos et viduas in27 Pure religion and undefiled before God
and the Father is this, To visit the fatherless and
afflictione ipsorum, inmaculatum servare se a
mundo.widows in their affliction, and to keep himself
unspotted from the world.
 
22Be ye doers of the word . The doer here is not the same as in Romans 2:13 , who satisfied the
law of God and fulfilled it in every part, but the doer is he who from the heart embraces God’s
word and testifies by his life that he really believes, according to the saying of Christ,
“Blessed are they who hear God’s word and keep it,”
(Luke 11:28 ;)
for he shews by the fruits what that implanting is, before mentioned. We must further observe,
that faith with all its works is included by James, yea, faith especially, as it is the chief work which
God requires from us. The import of the whole is, that we ought to labor that the word of the Lord
should strike root in us, so that it may afterwards fructify. 110
23He is like to a man . Heavenly doctrine is indeed a mirror in which God presents himself to
our view; but so that we may be transformed unto his image, as Paul says in 2 Corinthians 3:18 .
But here he speaks of the external glance of the eye, not of the vivid and efficacious meditation
which penetrates into the heart. It is a striking comparison, by which he briefly intimates, that a
doctrine merely heard and not received inwardly into the heart avails nothing, because it soon
vanishes away.
25The perfect law of liberty . After having spoken of empty speculation, he comes now to that
penetrating intuition which transforms us to the image of God. And as he had to do with the Jews,
he takes the word law, familiarly known to them, as including the whole truth of God.
110 Calvin  takes no notice of the last sentence, “deceiving yourselves.” The participle means deceiving by false reasoning.; it
may be rendered with Doddridge , “sophistically deceiving yourselves.”
184John Calvin Comm on Catholic Epistles
But why he calls it a perfect law , and a law of liberty , interpreters have not been able to
understand; for they have not perceived that there is here a contrast, which may be gathered from
other passages of Scripture. As long as the law is preached by the external voice of man, and not
inscribed by the finger and Spirit of God on the heart, it is but a dead letter, and as it were a lifeless
thing. It is, then, no wonder that the law is deemed imperfect, and that it is the law of bondage; for
as Paul teaches in Galatians 4:24 , separated from Christ, it generates to condemn and as the same
shews to us in Romans 8:13 , it can do nothing but fill us with diffidence and fear. But the Spirit of
regeneration, who inscribes it on our inward parts, brings also the grace of adoption. It is, then, the
same as though James had said, “The teaching of the law, let it no longer lead you to bondage, but,
on the contrary, bring you to liberty; let it no longer be only a schoolmaster, but bring you to
perfection: it ought to be received by you with sincere affection, so that you may lead a godly and
a holy life.”
Moreover, since it is a blessing of the Old Testament that the law of God should reform us, as
it appears from Jeremiah 31:33 , and other passages, it follows that it cannot be obtained until we
come to Christ. And, doubtless, he alone is the end and perfection of the law; and James adds
liberty , as an inseparable associate, because the Spirit of Christ never regenerates but that he becomes
also a witness and an earnest of our divine adoption, so as to free our hearts from fear and trembling.
And continueth . This is firmly to persevere in the knowledge of God; and when he adds, this
man shall be blessed in his deed , or work, he means that blessedness is to be found in doing, not
in cold hearing. 111
26Seem to be religious . He now reproves even in those who boasted that they were doers of
the law, a vice under which hypocrites commonly labor, that is, the wantonness of the tongue in
detraction. He has before touched on the duty of restraining the tongue, but for a different end; for
he then bade silence before God, that we might be more fitted to learn. He speaks now of another
thing, that the faithful should not employ their tongue in evil speaking.
It was indeed needful that this vice should be condemned, when the subject was the keeping of
the law; for they who have put off the grosser vices, are especially subject to this disease. He who
is neither an adulterer, nor a thief, nor a drunkard, but, on the contrary, seems brilliant with some
outward shew of sanctity will set himself off by defaming others, and this under the pretense of
zeal, but really through the lust of slandering.
The object here, then, was to distinguish between the true worshippers of God and hypocrites,
who are so swollen with Pharisaic pride, that they seek praise from the defects of others. If any
one, he says, seems to be religious,  that is, who has a show of sanctity, and the meantime flatters
himself by speaking evil of others, it is hence evident that he does not truly serve God. For by
saying that his religion is vain, he not only intimates that other virtues are marred by the stain of
evil-speaking, but that the conclusion is, that the zeal for religion which appears is not sincere.
But deceiveth his own heart . I do not approve of the version of Erasmus — “But suffers his
heart to err;” for he points out the fountain of that arrogance to which hypocrites are addicted,
through which, being blinded by an immoderate love of themselves, they believe themselves to be
far better than they really are; and hence, no doubt, is the disease of slandering, because the wallet,
as Aesop says in his Apologue, hanging behind, is not seen. Rightly, then, has James, wishing to
111 It may be rendered thus, — “The same shall be blessed in (or by) the doing of it,” that is, the work. The very doing of the
law of liberty, of what the gospel prescribes, makes a man blessed or happy.
185John Calvin Comm on Catholic Epistles
remove the effect, that is, the lust of evil-speaking, added the cause, even that hypocrites flatter
themselves immoderately. For they would be ready to forgive were they in their turn to acknowledge
themselves to be in need of forgiveness. Hence the flatteries by which they deceive themselves as
to their own vices, make them such supercilious censors of others.
27Pure religion . As he passes by those things which are of the greatest moment in religion, he
does not define generally what religion is, but reminds us that religion without the things he mentions
is nothing; as when one given to wine and gluttony boasts that he is temperate, and another should
object, and say that the temperate man is he who does not indulge in excess as to wine or eating;
his object is not to express the whole of what temperance is, but to refer only to one thing, suitable
to the subject in hand. For they are in vain religious of whom he speaks, as they are for the most
part trifling pretenders.
James then teaches us that religion is not to be estimated by the pomp of ceremonies; but that
there are important duties to which the servants of God ought to attend.
To visit in necessity  is to extend a helping hand to alleviate such as are in distress. And as there
are many others whom the Lord bids us to succor, in mentioning widows and orphans, he states a
part for the whole. There is then no doubt but that under one particular thing he recommends to us
every act of love, as though he had said, “Let him who would be deemed religious, prove himself
to be such by self denial and by mercy and benevolence towards his neighbors.”
And he says, before God , to intimate that it appears in deed otherwise to men, who are led astray
by external masks, but that we ought to seek what pleases him. By God and Father , we are to
understand God who is a father.
