---
layout: calvin-chapter
book_id: james
book_name: 雅各书
chapter: 2
total_chapters: 5
header-img: psalm-bg-mountain.jpg
date: 2026-04-30 20:24
---

CHAPTER 2
James 2:1-4
1 Fratres mei, ne in acceptionabus
personarum fidem habeatis Domini Jesu Christi
ex opinione, ( vel, gloriae. )1 My brethren, have not the faith of our Lord
Jesus Christ, the Lord  of glory, with respect of
persons.
2 Si enim ingressus fuerit in coetum vestrum
vir aureos anulos gestans, veste indudus2 For if there come unto your assembly a man
with a gold ring, in goodly apparel, and there
come in also a poor man in vile raiment; spliendida; ingressus autem fuerit et pauper in
sordida veste;
3 Et respexeritis in cum qui vestem fert
splendidam, et ei dixeritis, Tu sede hic honeste,3 And ye have respect to him that weareth
the gay clothing, and say unto him, Sit thou here
et pauperi dixeritis, Tu sta illic, vel, Sede hic sub
scabello pedum meorum;in a good place; and say to the poor, Stand thou
there, or sit here under my footstool:
4 An non dijudicati eestis in vobisipsis, et
facti judices malarum cogitationum?4 Are ye not then partial in yourselves, and
are become judges of evil thoughts?
 
186John Calvin Comm on Catholic Epistles
This reproof seems at first sight to be hard and unreasonable; for it is one of the duties of
courtesy, not to be neglected, to honor those who are elevated in the world. Further, if respect of
persons be vicious, servants are to be freed from all subjection; for freedom and servitude are
deemed by Paul as conditions of life. The same must be thought of magistrates. But the solution
of these questions is not difficult, if what James writes is not separated. For he does not simply
disapprove of honor being paid to the rich, but that this should not be done in a way so as to despise
or reproach the poor; and this will appear more clearly, when he proceeds to speak of the rule of
love.
Let us therefore remember that the respect of persons here condemned is that by which the rich
is so extolled, wrong is done to the poor, which also he shews clearly by the context and surely
ambitions is that honor, and full of vanity, which is shewn to the rich to the contempt of the poor.
Nor is there a doubt but that ambition reigns and vanity also, when the masks of this world are
alone in high esteem. We must remember this truth, that he is to be counted among the heirs of
God’s kingdom, who disregards the reprobate and honors those who fear God. ( Psalm 15:4 .)
Here then is the contrary vice condemned, that is, when from respect alone to riches, anyone
honors the wicked, and as it has been said, dishonors the good. If then thou shouldest read thus,
“He sins who respects the rich,” the sentence would be absurd; but if as follows, “He sins who
honors the rich alone and despises the poor, and treats him with contempt,” it would be a pious and
true doctrine.
1Have not the faith , etc., with respect of persons . He means that the respect of persons is
inconsistent with the faith of Christ, so that they cannot be united together, and rightly so; for we
are by faith united into one body, in which Christ holds the primacy. When therefore the pomps of
the world become preeminent so as to cover over what Christ is, it is evident that faith hath but
little vigor.
In rendering τὢς δόξης , “on account of esteem,” ( ex opinione ,) I have followed Erasmus; though
the old interpreter cannot be blamed, who has rendered it “glory,” for the word means both; and it
may be fitly applied to Christ, and that according to the drift of the passage. For so great is the
brightness of Christ, that it easily extinguishes all the glories of the world, if indeed it irradiates
our eyes. It hence follows, that Christ is little esteemed by us, when the admiration of worldly glory
lays hold on us. But the other exposition is also very suitable, for when the esteem or value of riches
or of honors dazzles our eyes, the truth is suppressed, which ought alone to prevail. To sit becomingly
means to sit honorably.
4Are ye not then partial in yourselves ? or, are ye not condemned in yourselves . This may be
read affirmatively as well as interrogatively, but the sense would be the same, for he amplifies the
fault by this, that they took delight and indulged themselves in so great a wickedness. If it be read
interrogatively, the meaning is, “Does not your own conscience hold you convicted, so that you
need no other judge?” If the affirmative be preferred, it is the same as though he had said, “This
evil also happens, that ye think not that ye sin, nor know that your thoughts are so wicked as they
are.” 112
112 It is commonly admitted to be an interrogatory sentence: “And do ye not make a difference among (or, in) yourselves, and
become judges, having evil thoughts?” literally, “judges of evil thoughts,” it being, as they say, the genitive case of possession.
Or the words may be rendered, “and become judges of evil (or, false) reasonings?” or as Beza  renders the sentence, “and become
judges, reasoning falsely,” concluding that the rich man was good and the poor man bad.
187John Calvin Comm on Catholic Epistles
James 2:5-7
5 Audite, fratres mei dilecti, nonne Deus
elegit pauperes mundi hujus divites in fide et
heredes regni quod promisit iis qui diligunt eum?5 Hearken, my beloved brethren, Hath not
God chosen the poor of this world rich in faith,
and heirs of the kingdom which he hath promised
to them that love him?
6 Vos autem contemptui habiustis pauperem:
nonne divites tyrnnidem in vos exercent et iidem
trahunt vos ad tribunalia?6 But ye have despised the poor. Do not rich
men oppress you, and draw you before the
judgment seats?
7 Et iidem contumelia afficiunt bonum nomen
quod invocatum est super vos?7 Do not they blaspheme that worthy name
by the which ye are called?
 
5Hearken, my beloved brethren . He proves now by a two-fold argument, that they acted
preposterously, when for the sake of the rich they despised the poor: The first is, that it is unbecoming
and disgraceful to cast down those whom God exalts, and to treat reproachfully those whom he
honors. As God honors the poor, then every one who repudiates them, reverses the order of God.
The other argument is taken from common experience; for since the rich are for the most part
vexatious to the good and innocent, it is very unreasonable to render such a reward for the wrongs
they do, so that they should be more approved by us than the poor, who aid us more than they wrong
us. We shall now see how he proceeds with these two points.
Hath not God chosen the poor of this world?  Not indeed alone, but he wished to begin with
them, that he might beat down the pride of the rich. This is also what Paul says, that God hath
chosen, not many noble, not many mighty in the world, but those who are weak, that he might make
ashamed such as are strong ( 1 Corinthians 1:25 .) In short, though God pours forth his grace on the
rich in common with the poor, yet his will is to prefer these to those, that the mighty might learn
not to flatter themselves, and that the ignoble and the obscure might ascribe in what they are to the
mercy of God, and that both might be trained up to meekness and humility.
The rich in faith  are not those who abound in the greatness of faith, but such as God has enriched
with the various gifts of his Spirit, which we receive by faith. For, doubtless, since the Lord deals
bountifully with all, every one becomes partaker of his gifts according to the measure of his own
faith. If, then, we are empty or needy, that proves the deficiency of our faith; for if we only enlarge
the bosom of faith, God is always ready to fill it.
He says, that a kingdom is promised to those who love God : not that the promise depends on
love; but he reminds us that we are called by God unto the hope of eternal life, on this condition
and to this end, that we may love him. Then the end, and not the beginning, is here pointed out.
6Do not the rich . He seems to instigate them to vengeance by bringing forward the unjust rule
of the rich, in order that they who were unjustly treated, might render like for like: and yet we are
everywhere bid to do good to those who injure us. But the object of James was another; for he only
It is said by Beza  and others, that διακρίνομαι  never means to be judged or condemned, but to distinguish, to discriminate,
to make a difference, and also to contend and to doubt. The difference made here was the respect of persons that was shewn,
and they made this difference in themselves, in their own minds, through the perverse or false thoughts or reasonings which they
entertained. But it appears that these preferences were shewn, not to the members of the Church, but to such strangers as might
happen to come to their assemblies.
188John Calvin Comm on Catholic Epistles
wished to shew that they were without reason or judgment who through ambition honored their
executioners, and in the meantime injured their own friends, at least those from whom they never
suffered any wrong. For hence appeared more fully their vanity, that they were induced by no acts
of kindness: they only admired the rich, because they were rich; nay, they servilely flattered those
whom they found, to their own loss, to be unjust and cruel.
There are, indeed, some of the rich who are just, and meek, and hate all unrighteousness; but
few of such men are to be found. James, then, mentions what for the most part usually happens,
and what daily experience proves true. For as men commonly exercise their power in doing what
is wrong, it hence happens, that the more power any one has, the worse he is, and the more unjust
towards his neighbors. The more careful then ought the rich to be, lest they should contract any of
the contagion which everywhere prevails among those of their own rank.
7Worthy, or good name . I doubt not but that he refers here to the name of God and of Christ.
And he says, by, or, on, the which ye are called ; not in prayer, as Scripture is wont sometimes to
speak, but by profession; as the name of a father, in Genesis 48:16 , is said to be called on his
offspring, and in Isaiah 4:1 , the name of a husband is called on the wife. It is, then, the same as
though he had said, “The good name in which ye glory, or which ye deem it an honor to be called
by; but if they proudly calumniate the glory of God, how unworthy are they of being honored by
Christians!”
James 2:8-11
8 Si legem quidem regiam perfectis juxta
scripturum, Diliges proximum tuum sicut te8 If ye fulfill the royal law according to the
scripture, Thou shalt love thy neighbour as
thyself, ye do well: ipsum, bene facitis. ( Leviticus 19:18; Matthew
22:39; Mark 12:31; Romans 13:9; Galatians
5:14.)
9 Sin personam respicitis, peccatum
committis, et redarguimini a lege veluti9 But if ye have respect to persons, ye
commit sin, and are convinced of the law as
transgressors. transgressores. ( Leviticus 19:15; Deuteronomy
1:17, 19 .)
10 Quisquis enim totam legem servaverit,
offenderit autem in uno, factus est omnium reus.10 For whosoever shall keep the whole law,
and yet offend in one point , he is guilty of all.
11 Nam qui dixit, Ne moecheris, dixit etiam,
Ne occidas. Quod si non fueris moechatus,
occideris tamen, factus es transgressor legis.11 For he that said, Do not commit adultery,
said also, Do not kill. Now if thou commit no
adultery, yet if thou kill, thou art become a
transgressor of the law.
 
Now follows a plainer declaration; for he expressly points out the cause of the last reproof, for
they were officiously attentive to the rich, not from love, but on the contrary, from a vain desire of
attaining their favor: And it is in anticipation, by which he obviated an excuse on the other side;
for they might have objected and said, that he ought not to be blamed, who humbly submiteth
189John Calvin Comm on Catholic Epistles
himself to the unworthy. James, indeed, concedes that this is true, but he shews that it was falsely
pretended by them, because they shewed this submission of homage, not from love to their neighbors,
but from respect of persons.
In the first clause, then, he acknowledges as right and praiseworthy, as the duties of love which
we perform towards our neighbors. In the second, he denies that the ambitious respect of persons
ought to be deemed as of this kind, for it widely differs from what the law prescribes. And the hinge
of this answer turns on the words “neighbor” and “respect of persons,” as though he had said, “If
you pretend that there is a sort of love in what you do, this may be easily disproved; for God bids
us to love our neighbors, and not to shew respect of persons.” Besides, this word “neighbor” includes
all mankind: he, then, who says, that a very few, according to his own fancy, ought to be honored,
and others passed by, does not keep the law of God, but yields to the depraved desires of his own
heart. God expressly commends to us strangers and enemies, and all, even the most contemptible.
To this doctrine the respect of persons is wholly contrary. Hence, rightly does James assert, that
respect of persons is inconsistent with love.
8 If ye fulfill the royal law . The law here I take simply as the rule of life; and to fulfill , or
perform it, is to keep it with real integrity of heart, and as they say, roundly, ( rotunde ;) and he sets
such a keeping in opposition to a partial observance of it. It is said, indeed, to be a royal law , as it
is the royal way, or road; that is, plain, straight, and level, which, by implication, is set in opposition
to sinuous by-paths and windings.
Allusion however is made, as I think, to servile obedience which they rendered to the rich, when
they might, by serving in sincerity their neighbors, be not only free men, but live as kings.
When, in the second place, he says, that those who had respect of persons were convinced , or
reproved  by the law, the law is taken according to its proper meaning. For since we are bidden by
God’s command to embrace all mortals, every one who, with a few exceptions, rejects all the rest,
breaks the bond of God, and inverts also his order, and is, therefore, rightly called a transgressor
of the law.
10For whosoever shall keep the whole law . What alone he means is, that God will not be
honored with exceptions, nor will he allow us to cut off from his law what is less pleasing to us.
At the first view, this sentence seems hard to some, as though the apostle countenanced the paradox
of the Stoics, which makes all sins equal, and as though he asserted that he who offends in one
thing ought to be punished equally with him whose whole life has been sinful and wicked. But it
is evident from the context that no such thing entered into his mind.
For we must always observe the reason anything is said. He denies that our neighbors are loved
when a part only of them is through ambition chosen, and the rest neglected. This he proves, because
it is no obedience to God, when it is not rendered equally according to his command. Then as the
rule of God is plain and complete or perfect, so we ought to regard completeness; so that none of
us should presumptuously separate what he has joined together. Let there be, therefore, a uniformity,
if we desire rightly to obey God. As, for instance, were a judge to punish ten thefts, and leave one
man unpunished, he would betray the obliquity of his mind, for he would thus shew himself indignant
against men rather than against crimes; because what he condemns in one he absolves in another.
We now, then, understand the design of James, that is, that if we cut off from God’s law what
is less agreeable to us, though in other parts we may be obedient, yet we be come guilty of all,
because in one particular thing we violate the whole law. And though he accommodates what is
said to the subject in hand, it is yet taken from a general principle, — that God has prescribed to
190John Calvin Comm on Catholic Epistles
us a rule of life, which it is not lawful for us to mutilate. For it is not said of a part of the law, “This
is the way, walk ye in it;” nor does the law promise a reward except to universal obedience.
Foolish, then, are the schoolmen, who deem partial righteousness, as they call it, to be
meritorious; for this passage and many others, clearly shew that there is no righteousness except
in a perfect obedience to the law.
11For he that said , or he who hath said . This is a proof of the former verse; because the
Lawgiver is to be considered rather than each particular precept apart. The righteousness of God,
as an indivisible body, is contained in the law. Whosoever, then, transgresses one article of the
Law, destroys, as far as he can, the righteousness of God. Besides, as in one part, so in every part,
God’s will is to try our obedience. Hence a transgressor of the law is every one who offends as to
any one of its commandments according to this saying,
“Cursed is he who fulfills not all things.”
(Deuteronomy 27:26 .)
We further see, that the transgressor of the law, and the guilty of all, mean the same according
to James.
James 2:12-13
12 Sic loquimini, et sic facite, ut per legem
libertatis judicandi.12 So speak ye, and so do, as they that shall
be judged by the law of liberty.
13 Judicium enim sine misericordia ei qui
non praestiterit misericordiam; et gloriatur
misericordia adversus judicium.13 For he shall have judgment without mercy,
that hath shewed no mercy; and mercy rejoiceth
against judgment.
 
12So speak ye . Some give this explanation, that as they flattered themselves too much, they
are summoned to the right tribunal; for men absolve themselves according to their own notions,
because they withdraw themselves from the judgment of the divine law. He then reminds them that
all deeds and words are there to be accounted for, because God will judge the world according to
his law. As, however, such a declaration might have smitten them with immoderate terror, to correct
or mitigate what they might have thought severe, he adds, the law of liberty . For we know what
Paul says,
“Whosoever are under the law are under a curse.”
(Galatians 3:10 .)
Hence the judgment of the law in itself is condemnation to eternal death; but he means by the
word liberty , that we are freed from the rigor of the law.
This meaning is not altogether unsuitable, though if one examines more minutely what
immediately follows, he will see that James meant another thing; the sense is as though he had said,
“Except ye wish to undergo the rigor of the law, ye must be less rigid towards your neighbors; for
the law of liberty is the same as the mercy of God, which delivers us from the curse of the law”
And so this verse ought to be read with what follows, where he speaks of the duty of bearing with
infirmities. And doubtless the whole passage thus reads well: “Since none of us can stand before
God, except we be delivered and freed from the strict rigor of the law, we ought so to act, that we
191John Calvin Comm on Catholic Epistles
may not through too much severity exclude the indulgence or mercy of God, of which we all have
need to the last.”
13 For he shall have judgment.  This is an application of the last verse to the subject in hand,
which confirms altogether the second explanation which I have mentioned: for he shews, that since
we stand through God’s mercy alone, we ought to shew that to those whom the Lord himself
commends to us. It is, indeed, a singular commendation of kindness and benevolence, that God
promises that he will be merciful to us, if we be so to our brethren: not that our mercy, how ever
great it may be, shewn towards men, merits the mercy of God; but that God would have those whom
he has adopted, as he is to them a kind and an indulgent Father, to bear and exhibit his image on
the earth, according to the saying of Christ,
“Be ye merciful, as your heavenly Father is merciful.”
(Matthew 5:7 .)
We must notice, on the other hand, that he could denounce nothing on them more severe or
more dreadful than the judgment of God. It hence follows, that all they are miserable and lost who
flee not to the asylum of pardon.
And mercy rejoiceth . As though he had said, “God’s mercy alone is that which delivers us from
the dread and terror of judgment.” he takes rejoicing  or glorying  in the sense of being victorious
or triumphant; for the judgment of condemnation is suspended over the whole world, and nothing
but mercy can bring relief.
Hard and forced is the explanation of those who regard mercy as put here for the person, for
men cannot properly be said to rejoice or glory against the judgment of God; but mercy itself in a
manner triumphs, and alone reigns when the severity of judgment gives way; though I do not deny
but that hence arises confidence in rejoicing, that is, when the faithful know that the wrath of God
in a manner yields to mercy, so that being relieved by the latter, they are not overwhelmed by the
former.
James 2:14-17
14 Quid prodest, fratres mei, si fidem
dicataliquis se habere, opera autem non habeat?
nunquid potest fides salvum facere ipsum?14 What doth it  profit, my brethren, though
a man say he hath faith, and have not works? can
faith save him?
15 Quod si frater aut soror nudi fuerint, et
egentes quotidiano victu,15 If a brother or sister be naked, and
destitute of daily food,
16 Dicat autem aliquis vestrum illis, Abite
cum pace, calescite et saturamini; non tamen16 And one of you say unto them, Depart in
peace, be ye warmed and filled; notwithstanding
dederitis quae sunt necessaria corpori, quae
utilitas?ye give them not those things which are needful
to the body; what doth it  profit?
17 Sic et fides, si opera non habuerit, mortua
est per se.17 Even so faith, if it hath not works, is dead,
being alone.
 
192John Calvin Comm on Catholic Epistles
14What doth it profit . He proceeds to commend mercy. And as he had threatened that God
would be a severe Judge to us, and at the same time very dreadful, except we be kind and merciful
towards our neighbors, and as on the other hand hypocrites objected and said, that faith is sufficient
to us, in which the salvation of men consists, he now condemns this vain boasting. The sum, then,
of what is said is, that faith without love avails nothing, and that it is therefore wholly dead.
But here a question arises, Can faith be separated from love? It is indeed true that the exposition
of this passage has produced that common distinction of the Sophists, between unformed and formed
faith; but of such a thing James knew nothing, for it appears from the first words, that he speaks of
false profession of faith: for he does not begin thus, “If any one has faith;” but, “If any says that
he has faith;” by which he certainly intimates that hypocrites boast of the empty name of faith,
which really does not belong to them.
That he calls it then faith,  is a concession, as the Rhetoricians say; for when we discuss a point,
it does no harm, nay, it is sometimes expedient, to concede to an adversary what he demands, for
as soon as the thing itself is known, what is conceded may be easily taken away from him. James
then, as he was satisfied that it was a false pretext by which hypocrites covered themselves, was
not disposed to raise a dispute about a word or an expression. Let us, however, remember that he
does not speak according to the impression of his own mind when he mentions faith, but that on
the contrary he disputes against those who made a false pretense as to faith, of which they were
wholly destitute.
Can faith save him?  This is the same as though he had said, that we do not attain salvation by
a frigid and bare knowledge of God, which all confess to be most true; for salvation comes to us
by faith for this reason, because it joins us to God. And this comes not in any other way than by
being united to the body of Christ, so that, living through his Spirit, we are also governed by him.
There is no such thing as this in the dead image of faith. There is then no wonder that James denies
that salvation is connected with it. 113
15If a brother , or, For if a brother . He takes an example from what was connected with his
subject; for he had been exhorting them to exercise the duties of love. If any one, on the contrary,
boasted that he was satisfied with faith without works, he compares this shadowy faith to the saying
of one who bids a famished man to be filled without supplying him with the food of which he is
destitute. As, then, he who sends away a poor man with words, and offers him no help, treats him
with mockery, so they who devise for themselves faith without works, and without any of the duties
of religion, trifle with God. 114
17Is dead, being alone . He says that faith is dead, being by itself, that is, when destitute of
good works. We hence conclude that it is indeed no faith, for when dead, it does not properly retain
the name. The Sophists plead this expression and say, that some sort of faith is found by itself; but
this frivolous caviling is easily refuted; for it is sufficiently evident that the Apostle reasons from
what is impossible, as Paul calls an angel anathema, if he attempted to subvert the gospel. ( Galatians
1:8.)
113 When he says “Can faith save him?” his meaning is “Can the faith which he says he has save him?” that is, faith which is
dead and produces no works; for that is the faith clearly intended here, as it appears from what follows. To make the meaning
more evident, Macknight  renders the sentence thus, — “Can this faith save him?” that is, the faith that has not works.
114 This is adduced as an illustration: as the saying of a man to the naked, “Be ye clothed,” when he does nothing, effects no
good, is wholly useless, so is that faith that produces no works; it being as it were dead, it cannot save.
193John Calvin Comm on Catholic Epistles
James 2:18-19
18 Quin dicat quispam, Tu fidem habes, et
ego opera habeo; ostende mihi fidem tuam sine18 Yea, a man may say, Thou hast faith, and
I have works: shew me thy faith without thy
operibus (alias, ex operibus) tuis, et ego tibi ex
operibus meis ostendam fidem meam.works, and I will shew thee my faith by my
works.
19 Tu credis quod Deus unus est, bene facis;
et daemones credunt, ac contremiscunt.19 Thou believest that there is one God; thou
doest well: the devils also believe, and tremble.
 
18Yea, a man may say . Erasmus introduces here two persons as speakers; one of whom boasts
of faith without works, and the other of works without faith; and he thinks that both are at length
confuted by the Apostle. But this view seems to me too forced. He thinks it strange, that this should
be said by James, Thou hast faith , who acknowledges no faith without works. But in this he is much
mistaken, that he does not acknowledge an irony in these words. Then ἀλλὰ  I take for “nay rather;”
and τὶς for “any one;” for the design of James was to expose the foolish boasting of those who
imagined that they had faith when by their life they shewed that they were unbelievers; for he
intimates that it would be easy for all the godly who led a holy life to strip hypocrites of that boasting
with which they were inflated. 115
Shew me . Though the more received reading is, “by works,” yet the old Latin is more suitable,
and the reading is also found in some Greek copies. I therefore hesitated not to adopt it. Then he
bids to shew faith without works, and thus reasons from what is impossible, to prove what does
not exist. So he speaks ironically. But if any one prefers the other reading, it comes to the same
thing, “Shew me by works thy faith;” for since it is not an idle thing, it must necessarily be proved
by works. The meaning then is, “Unless thy faith brings forth fruits, I deny that thou hast any faith.”
116
But it may be asked, whether the outward uprightness of life is a sure evidence of faith? For
James says, “ I will shew thee my faith by my works .” To this I reply, that the unbelieving sometimes
excel in specious virtues, and lead an honorable life free from every crime; and hence works
apparently excellent may exist apart from faith. Nor indeed does James maintain that every one
115 I would render the verse thus:
“But one may say, Thou hast faith, I also have works; shew me thy faith that is without works, and I will shew thee my
faith by my works.”
It is the same as though he had said, “Thou hast faith only, I have also works in addition to my faith; now, prove to me that
you have true faith without having works connected with it, (which was impossible, hence he is called a ‘vain man,’ or
empty-headed, in James 2:20 ,) and I will prove my faith by its fruits, even good works.
116Griesbach  and others regard χωρὶς  as the true reading, countenanced by most MSS., and found in the Syr. and Vulg.
This verse is a key to the meaning of James: faith is to be proved  by works; then faith properly justifies and saves, and
works prove its genuineness. When he says that a man is justified by works, the meaning according to this verse is, that a man
is proved by his works to be justified, his faith thereby being shewn to be a living and not a dead faith. We may well be surprised,
as Doddridge  was, that any, taking a view of this whole passage, should ever think that there is any contrariety in what is here
said to be the teaching of Paul. The doctrine of Paul, that man is justified by faith and not by works, that is, by a living faith,
which works by love, is perfectly consistent with what James says, that is, that a man is not justified by a dead faith but by that
faith which proves its living power by producing good works, or by rendering obedience to God. The sum of what James says
is, that a dead faith cannot save, but a living faith, and that a living faith is a working faith — a doctrine taught by Paul as well
as by James.
194John Calvin Comm on Catholic Epistles
who seems good possesses faith. This only he means, that faith, without the evidence of good works,
is vainly pretended, because fruit ever comes from the living root of a good tree.
19Thou believest that there is one God . From this one sentence it appears evident that the whole
dispute is not about faith, but of the common knowledge of God, which can no more connect man
with God, than the sight of the sun carry him up to heaven; but it is certain that by faith we come
nigh to God. Besides, it would be ridiculous were any one to say, that the devils have faith; and
James prefers them in this respect to hypocrites. The devil trembles , he says, at the mention of
God’s name, because when he acknowledges his own judge he is filled with the fear of him. He
then who despises an acknowledged God is much worse.
Thou doest well , is put down for the purpose of extenuating, as though he had said, “It is,
forsooth! a great thing to sink down below the devils.” 117
James 2:20-26
20 Vis autem scire, O homo inanis! quod
fides absque operibus mortua sit?20 But wilt thou know, O vain man, that faith
without works is dead?
21 Abraham pater noster, nonne ex operibus
justificatus est, quum filium suum Isaac super
altare?21 Was not Abraham our father justified by
works, when he had offered Isaac his son upon
the altar?
22 Vides quod fides cooperata fuerit ejus
operibus, et ex operibus fides perfecta fuerit?22 Seest thou how faith wrought with his
works, and by works was faith made perfect?
23 Atque implenta fuit scriptura, quae dicit,
Credidit Abraham Deo, et imputatum illi fuit in
justitiam, et Amicus Deo vacatus est?23 And the scripture was fulfilled which
saith, Abraham believed God, and it was imputed
unto him for righteousness: and he was called the
Friend of God.
24 Videtis igitur quod ex operibus justificatur
homo, et non ex fide solum.24 Ye see then how that by works a man is
justified, and not by faith only.
25 Similiter et Rahab meretrix, nonne ex
operibus justificata est, quum excepit nuntios, et
alia via ejecit?25 Likewise also was not Rahab the harlot
justified by works, when she had received the
messengers, and had sent them  out another way?
26 Quemadmodum enim corpus sine anima
mortuum est, ita et fides sine operibus mortua
est.26 For as the body without the spirit is dead,
so faith without works is dead also.
 
117 The design of alluding to the faith of devils seems to have been this, to shew that though a good man may believe and
tremble, yet if he does not obey God and do good works, he has no true evidence of faith. Obedient faith is that which saves,
and not merely that which makes us tremble. The connection with the preceding verse seems to be as follows, —
In the former verse the boaster of mere faith is challenged to prove that his faith is right and therefore saving; the challenger
would prove by his works. Then, in this verse, a test is applied — the very first article of faith is mentioned: “Be it that you
believe this, yet this faith will not save you: the devils have this faith, and instead of being saved they tremble.
195John Calvin Comm on Catholic Epistles
20But wilt thou know . We must understand the state of the question, for the dispute here is not
respecting the cause of justification, but only what avails a profession of faith without works, and
what opinion we are to form of it. Absurdly then do they act who strive to prove by this passage
that man is justified by works, because James meant no such thing, for the proofs which he subjoins
refer to this declaration, that no faith, or only a dead faith, is without works. No one will ever
understand what is said, nor judge wisely of words, except he who keeps in view the design of the
writer.
21Was not Abraham . The Sophists lay hold on the word justified , and then they cry out as
being victorious, that justification is partly by works. But we ought to seek out a right interpretation
according to the general drift of the whole passage. We have already said that James does not speak
here of the cause of justification, or of the manner how men obtain righteousness, and this is plain
to every one; but that his object was only to shew that good works are always connected with faith;
and, therefore, since he declares that Abraham was justified by works , he is speaking of the proof
he gave of his justification.
When, therefore, the Sophists set up James against Paul, they go astray through the ambiguous
meaning of a term. When Paul says that we are justified by faith, he means no other thing than that
by faith we are counted righteous before God. But James has quite another thing in view, even to
shew that he who professes that he has faith, must prove the reality of his faith by his works.
Doubtless James did not mean to teach us here the ground on which our hope of salvation ought
to rest; and it is this alone that Paul dwells upon. 118
That we may not then fall into that false reasoning which has deceived the Sophists, we must
take notice of the two fold meaning, of the word justified . Paul means by it the gratuitous imputation
of righteousness before the tribunal of God; and James, the manifestation of righteousness by the
conduct, and that before men, as we may gather from the preceding words, “Shew to me thy faith,”
etc. In this sense we fully allow that man is justified by works, as when any one says that a man is
enriched by the purchase of a large and valuable chest, because his riches, before hid, shut up in a
chest, were thus made known.
22By works was faith made perfect119 By this he again shews, that the question here is not
respecting the cause of our salvation, but whether works necessarily accompany faith; for in this
sense it is said to have been perfected by works, because it was not idle. It is said to have been
perfected by works, not because it received thence its own perfection, but because it was thus proved
to be true. For the futile distinction which the Sophists draw from these words, between formed
and unformed faith, needs no labored refutation; for the faith of Abram was formed and therefore
perfected before he sacrificed his son. And this work was not as it were the finishing, or last work.
118 It is justly observed by Scott , that there is the same difficulty in reconciling James with himself as with Paul. And this
difficulty at once vanishes, when we take a view of the whole passage, and not confine ourselves to single expressions.
119 The previous sentence is hardly intelligible in our version or in Calvin’s.  “Seest thou how faith wrought (co-operated, by
C.) with his works?” The verb is συνεργέω , which means properly to work together, to co-operate; and it means also, as the
effect of co-operating, to aid, to help. “Seest thou how faith aided him in his works?” Schleusner  gives this paraphrase, “Thou
sees that Abraham was aided by his faith to do his remarkable works.” Beza’s  version is, “Thou seest that faith was the assistant
(administer ) of his works.” Some give the idea of combining to co-operating, “Thou seest that faith co-operated with his works,”
that is, in justification. It has been said, that if this combination had been intended, it ought to have been said that works co-operated
with his faith, as faith, according to the testimony of scripture and the nature of things, is the primary and the principal thing,
and as there can be no good works without faith. But the first explanation is the most consonant with the words and with the
drift of the passage.
196John Calvin Comm on Catholic Epistles
Formerly things afterwards followed by which Abraham proved the increase of his faith. Hence
this was not the perfection of his faith, nor did it then for the first time put on its form. James then
understood no other thing, than that the integrity of his faith then appeared, because it brought forth
that remarkable fruit of obedience.
23And the Scripture was fulfilled . They who seek to prove from this passage of James that the
works of Abraham were imputed for righteousness, must necessarily confess that Scripture is
perverted by him; for however they may turn and twist, they can never make the effect to be its
own cause. The passage is quoted from Moses. ( Genesis 15:6 .) The imputation of righteousness
which Moses mentions, preceded more than thirty years the work by which they would have
Abraham to have been justified. Since faith was imputed to Abraham fifteen years before the birth
of Isaac, this could not surely have been done through the work of sacrificing him. I consider that
all those are bound fast by an indissoluble knot, who imagine that righteousness was imputed to
Abraham before God, because he sacrificed his son Isaac, who was not yet born when the Holy
Spirit declared that Abraham was justified. It hence necessarily follows that something posterior
is pointed out here.
Why then does James say that it was fulfilled? Even because he intended to shew what sort of
faith that was which justified Abraham; that is, that it was not idle or evanescent, but rendered him
obedient to God, as also we find in Hebrews 11:8 . The conclusion, which is immediately added,
as it depends on this, has no other meaning. Man is not justified by faith alone, that is, by a bare
and empty knowledge of God; he is justified by works, that is, his righteousness is known and
proved by its fruits.
25Likewise also was not Rahab . It seems strange that he connected together those who were
so unlike. Why did he not rather choose some one from so large a number of illustrious fathers,
and join him to Abraham? Why did he prefer a harlot to all others? he designedly put together two
persons so different in their character, in order more clearly to shew, that no one, whatever may
have been his or her condition, nation, or class in society, has ever been counted righteous without
good works. He had named the patriarch, by far the most eminent of all; he now includes under the
person of a harlot, all those who, being aliens, were joined to the Church. Whosoever, then, seeks
to be counted righteous, though he may even be among the lowest, must yet shew that he is such
by good works.
James, according to his manner of speaking, declares that Rahab was justified by works; and
the Sophists hence conclude that we obtain righteousness by the merits of works. But we deny that
the dispute here is concerning the mode of obtaining righteousness. We, indeed, allow that good
works are required for righteousness; we only take away from them the power of conferring
righteousness, because they cannot stand before the tribunal of God. 120
120 The last verse is left unnoticed, —
James 2:26  “For as the body without the spirit is dead, so faith without works (or, having no works) is dead.”
The meaning is not, that works are to faith what the spirit is to the body, for that would make works to be the life of faith,
the reverse of the fact; but the meaning is, that faith having no works is like a dead carcass without life.
197John Calvin Comm on Catholic Epistles
