---
layout: calvin-chapter
book_id: james
book_name: 雅各书
chapter: 4
total_chapters: 5
header-img: psalm-bg-mountain.jpg
date: 2026-04-30 20:24
---

CHAPTER 4
James 4:1-3
1 Unde bella et pugnae inter vos? nonne hinc,
ex voluptatibus vestris, quae militant in membris
vestris.1 From whence come  wars and fightings
among you? come they  not hence, even of your
lusts that war in your members?
2 Concupiscitis et non habetis; invidetis et
aemulamini, et non potestis obtinere; pugnatis et2 Ye lust, and have not: ye kill, and desire to
have, and cannot obtain: ye fight and war, yet ye
have not, because ye ask not. belligeramini, non habetis, propterea quod non
petitis;
3 Petitis, et non accipitis, quia male petitis,
ut in voluptates vestras insumatis.3 Ye ask, and receive not, because ye ask
amiss, that ye may consume it upon your lusts.
 
1From whence come wars . As he had spoken of peace, and had reminded them that vices are
to be exterminated in such a way as to preserve peace, he now comes to their contentions, by which
they created confusion among themselves; and he shews that these arose from their invidious desires
and lusts, rather than from a zeal for what was just and right; for if every one observed moderation,
they would not have disturbed and annoyed one another. They had their hot conflicts, because their
lusts were allowed to prevail unchecked.
It hence appears, that greater peace would have been among them, had every one abstained
from doing wrong to others; but the vices which prevailed among them were so many attendants
dissembling, or acting dishonestly. By this comparison, we see what were some of the things included in “every evil work;” they
were the reverse of mercy or benevolence, and its fruits, even censoriousness or partiality, and dissimilation. And yet those who
exhibited all those evil things thought that they had wisdom! and even gloried in it!
205John Calvin Comm on Catholic Epistles
armed to excite contentions. He calls our faculties members . He takes lusts as designating all illicit
and lustful desires or propensities which cannot be satisfied without doing injury to others.
2Ye lust, or covet, and have not . He seems to intimate that the soul of man is insatiable, when
he indulges wicked lusts; and truly it is so; for he who suffers his sinful propensities to rule
uncontrolled, will know no end to his lust. Were even the world given to him, he would wish other
worlds to be created for him. It thus happens, that men seek torments which exceed the cruelty of
all executioners. For that saying of Horace is true:
The tyrants of Sicily found no torment greater than envy. 129
Some copies have φονεύετε , “ye kill;” but I doubt not but that we ought to read, φθονεῖτε , “ye
envy,” as I have rendered it; for the verb, to kill, does in no way suit the context. 130Ye fight : he
does not mean those wars and fightings, which men engage in with drawn swords, but the violent
contentions which prevailed among them. They derived no benefit from contentions of this kind,
for he affirms that they received the punishment of their own wickedness. God, indeed, whom they
owned not as the author of blessings, justly disappointed them. For when they contended in ways
so unlawful, they sought to be enriched through the favor of Satan rather than through the favor of
God. One by fraud, another by violence, one by calumnies, and all by some evil or wicked arts,
strove for happiness. They then sought to be happy, but not through God. It was therefore no wonder
that they were frustrated in their efforts, since no success can be expected except through the
blessings of God alone.
3Ye seek and receive not . He goes farther: though they sought, yet they were deservedly denied;
because they wished to make God the minister of their own lusts. For they set no bounds to their
wishes, as he had commanded; but gave unbridled license to themselves, so as to ask those things
of which man, conscious of what is right, ought especially to be ashamed. Pliny somewhere ridicules
this impudence, that men so wickedly abuse the ears of God. The less tolerable is such a thing in
Christians, who have had the rule of prayer given them by their heavenly Master.
And doubtless there appears to be in us no reverence for God, no fear of him, in short, no regard
for him, when we dare to ask of him what even our own conscience does not approve. James meant
briefly this, — that our desires ought to be bridled: and the way of bridling them is to subject them
to the will of God. And he also teaches us, that what we in moderation wish, we ought to seek from
God himself; which if it be done, we shall be preserved from wicked contentions, from fraud and
violence, and from doing any injury to others.
129 Invidia Siculi non invenere tyranni Majus tormentum . — EPIST. Lib. I. 2:58.
130There is no MS. nor version in favor of φθονεῖτε . When it is said, “ye kill,” the meaning is, that they did so as to the hatred
or envy they entertained, for hatred is the root of murder, and arises often from envy. What has evidently led Calvin  and others
to conjecture a mistake here, has been the difficulty arising from the order of the words, “Ye kill and ye envy;” but this order is
wholly consonant with the style of Scripture, where often the greater evil or good is mentioned first, and then that which precedes
or leads to it. It is the same here as though the copulative, and, were rendered causatively, “ye kill because ye envy.” Envy is
murder in the sight of God.
The language of the whole passage is highly metaphorical. He calls their contentions “wars and fightings;” for the whole
tenor of the passage is opposed to the supposition that he refers to actual wars. He adopts a military term as to inward lusts or
ambitious desires, that they “carried on war” in their members; the expedition for their contests was prepared within, mustered
in their hearts. Then the character of this war is more plainly defined, “Ye covet,” not, ye lust; “ye kill,” or commit murder, for
“ye envy;” when ye cannot attain your objects, “ye wage war and fight,” that is, ye wrangle and quarrel. Avarice and ambition
were the two prevailing evils, but especially avarice; and avarice too for the purpose of gratifying the lusts and propensities of
their sinful nature, as it appears from the third verse.
206John Calvin Comm on Catholic Epistles
James 4:4-6
4 Adulteri et adulterae, an nescitis quod
amicitia mundi inimictia Dei est? qui ergo4 Ye adulterers and adulteresses, know ye
not that the friendship of the world is enmity with
voluerit amicus esse mundi, inimicus Dei
constituitur.God? whosoever therefore will be a friend of the
world is the enemy of God.
5 An putatis quod frustra dicat scriptura? An
ad invidiam concupiscit spiritus qui habitat in
nobis?5 Do ye think that the scripture saith in vain,
The spirit that dwelleth in us lusteth to envy?
6 Quin majorem dat gratiam: — 6 But he giveth more grace. Wherefore he
saith, God resisteth the proud, but giveth grace
unto the humble.
 
4Ye adulterers . I connect this verse with the foregoing verses: for he calls them adulterers , as
I think, metaphorically; for they corrupted themselves with the vanities of this world, and alienated
themselves from God; as though he had said, that they had become degenerated, or were become
bastards. We know how frequent, in Holy Scripture, is that marriage mentioned which God forms
with us. He would have us, then, to be like a chaste virgin, as Paul says, ( 2 Corinthians 11:2 .) This
chastity is violated and corrupted by all impure affections towards the world. James, then, does not
without reason compare the love of the world to adultery.
They, then, who take his words literally, do not sufficiently observe the context: for he goes on
still to speak against the lusts of men, which lead away those entangled with the world from God,
as it follows, —
The friendship of the world . He calls it the friendship of the world when men surrender
themselves to the corruptions of the world, and become slaves to them. For such and so great is the
disagreement between the world and God, that as much as any one inclines to the world, so much
he alienates himself from God. Hence the Scripture bids us often to renounce the world, if we wish
to serve God.
5Do ye think . He seems to adduce from Scripture the next following sentence. Hence interpreters
toil much, because none such, at least none exactly alike, is found in Scripture. But nothing hinders
the reference to be made to what has been already said, that is, that the friendship of the world is
adverse to God. Moreover; it has been rightly said, that this is a truth which occurs everywhere in
Scripture. And that he has omitted the pronoun, which would have rendered the sentence clearer,
is not to be wondered at, for, as it is evident, he is everywhere very concise.
The Spirit , or, Does the Spirit?  Some think that the soul of man is meant, and therefore read
the sentence affirmatively, and according to this meaning, — that the spirit of man, as it is malignant,
is so infected with envy, that it has ever a mixture of it. They, however, think better who regard
the Spirit of God as intended; for it is he that is given to dwell in us. 131 I then take the Spirit as that
131 There are wagon-loads of interpretations, says Erasmus , on this passage. The one given by Calvin , and adopted by Whitby ,
Doddridge , Scholefield , and others, is the most satisfactory, and what alone enables us to see a meaning in the words, “more
grace,” in the following verse. The Spirit dwells in God’s people, and he dwells there to give more or increasing grace, according
to the tenor of what is said in Isaiah 57:15 , where God is said to “dwell with him that is of a contrite and humble spirit,” and for
this purpose, “to revive the spirit of the humble,” etc.
207John Calvin Comm on Catholic Epistles
of God, and read the sentence as a question; for it was his object to prove, that because they envied
they were not ruled by the Spirit of God; because he teaches the faithful otherwise; and this he
confirms in the next verse, by adding that he giveth more grace
For it is an argument arising from what is contrary. Envy is a proof or sign of malignity; but
the Spirit of God proves himself to be bountiful by the affluence of his blessings. There is then
nothing more repugnant to his nature than envy. In short, James denies that the Spirit of God rules
where depraved lusts prevail, which excite to mutual contention; because it is peculiarly the office
of the Spirit to enrich men more and more continually with new gifts.
I will not stop to refute other explanations. Some give this meaning that the Spirit lusteth against
envy; which is too harsh and forced. Then they say that God gives more grace  to conquer and
subdue lust. But the meaning I have given is more suitable and simple, — that he restores us by
his bounty from the power of malignant emulation. The continuative particle δὲ is to be taken
adversatively, for ἀλλὰ  or ἀλλά γε; so have I rendered it quin, but.
James 4:7-10
7 Subjecti igitur estote Deo; Resistite diabolo,
et fugiet a vobis;7 Submit yourselves therefore to God. Resist
the devil, and he will flee from you.
8 Appropinquate Deo, et appropinquabit
vobis; mundate manus, peccatores; purificate
corda duplici animo;8 Draw nigh to God, and he will draw nigh
to you. Cleanse your hands, ye sinners; and purify
your hearts, ye double minded.
9 Affligimini, lugete et plorate; risus vester
in luctum vertatur et gaudium in moerorem.9 Be afflicted, and mourn, and weep: let your
laughter be turned to mourning, and your joy to
heaviness.
10 Humiliamini coram Deo, et eriget vos. 10 Humble yourselves in the sight of the
Lord, and he shall lift you up.
 
7Submit yourselves . The submission which he recommends is that of humility; for he does not
exhort us generally to obey God, but requires submission; for the Spirit of God rests on the humble
and the meek. ( Isaiah 57:15 .) On this account he uses the illative particle. For as he had declared
that God’s Spirit is bountiful in increasing his gifts, he hence concludes that we ought to lay aside
envy, and to submit to God.
Many copies have introduced here the following sentence: “Wherefore he saith, God resisteth
the proud, but giveth grace unto the humble.” But in others it is not found. Erasmus suspects that
it was first a note in the margin, and afterwards crept into the text. It may have been so, though it
is not unsuitable to the passage. For what some think, that it is strange that what is found only in
 
5, 6 “Do ye think that the scripture speaketh thus in vain? Doth the Spirit who dwells in us lust to envy? nay, but he giveth
more (or increasing) grace: he therefore saith, God sets himself in array against the insolent, but gives grace to the humble.”
The humble are those who are made so by grace; but God promises to give them more grace, to perfect that which had
begun.
208John Calvin Comm on Catholic Epistles
Peter, should be quoted as Scripture, may be easily disposed of. But I rather conjecture that this
sentence which accords with the common doctrine of Scripture, had become then a sort of proverbial
saying common among the Jews. And, indeed, it is no more than what is found in Psalm 18:27 ,
“The humble O Lord, thou wilt save;
and the eyes of the proud wilt thou cast down:”
and similar sentences are found in many other passages. 132
Resist the devil . He shews what that contention is which we ought to engage in, as Paul says,
that our contest is not with flesh and blood, but he stimulates us to a spiritual fight. Then, after
having taught us meekness towards men, and submission towards God, he brings before us Satan
as our enemy, whom it behooves us to fight against.
However, the promise which he adds, respecting the fleeing of Satan, seems to be refuted by
daily experience; for it is certain, that the more strenuously any one resists, the more fiercely he is
urged. For Satan, in a manner, acts playfully, when he is not in earnest repelled; but against those
who really resist him, he employs all the strength he possesses. And further, he is never wearied
with fighting; but when conquered in one battle, he immediately engages in another. To this I reply,
that fleeing is to be taken here for putting to flight, or routing. And, doubtless, though he repeats
his attacks continually, he yet always departs vanquished.
8Draw nigh to God . He again reminds us that the aid of God will not be wanting to us, provided
we give place to him. For when he bids us to draw nigh to God, that we may know him to be near
to us, he intimates that we are destitute of his grace, because we withdraw from him. But as God
stands on our side, there is no reason to fear succumbing. But if any one concludes from this passage,
that the first part of the work belongs to us, and that afterwards the grace of God follows, the Apostle
meant no such thing; for though we ought to do this, yet it does [not] immediately follow that we
can. And the Spirit of God, in exhorting us to our duty, derogates nothing from himself, or from
his own power; but the very thing he bids us to do, he himself fulfills in us.
In short, James meant no other thing in this passage, than that God is never wanting to us, except
when we alienate ourselves from him. He is like one who brings the hungry to a table and the thirsty
to a fountain. There is this difference, that our steps must be guided and sustained by the Lord, for
our feet fail us. But what some cavil at, and say, that God’s grace is secondary to our preparation,
and as it were the waiting-maid, is only frivolous; for we know that it is no new thing that he adds
now to former graces and thus enriches more and more those to whom he has already given much.
Cleanse your hands . He here addresses all those who were alienated from God and he does not
refer to two sorts of men, but he calls the same sinners  and double-minded  Nor does he understand
every kind of sinners, but the wicked and those of a corrupt life. It is said in John 9:3 ,
“God does not hear sinners;”
in the same sense a woman is called a sinner by Luke. ( Luke 7:39 .) It is said by the same and
the other evangelists, “He drinketh and eateth with sinners.” He, therefore, does not smite all
indiscriminately to that sort of repentance mentioned here, but those who are wicked and corrupt
in heart, and whose life is base and flagitious or at least wicked; it is from these he requires a purity
of heart and outward cleanliness.
132 The passage is found in all MSS. and versions: there is, therefore, no ground to think it an interpolation. And it is taken
literally from Proverbs 3:34 , according to the Sept. ; though the first clause differs from the Hebrew in words, yet it is substantially
the same. To “scorn the scorners,” and to “resist (or, to stand in array against) the proud” or insolent, mean the same thing.
209John Calvin Comm on Catholic Epistles
We hence learn what is the true character of repentance. It is not only an outward amendment
of life, but its beginning is the cleansing of the heart. It is also necessary on the other hand that the
fruits of inward repentance should appear in the brightness of our works. 133
9Be afflicted and mourn . Christ denounces mourning on those who laugh, as a curse, ( Luke
6:25;) and James, in what shortly follows, alluding to the same words, threatens the rich with
mourning. But here he speaks of that salutary mourning or sorrow which leads us to repentance.
He addresses those who, being inebriated in their minds, did not perceive God’s judgment. Thus
it happened that they flattered themselves in their vices. That he might shake off from them this
deadly torpor, he admonishes them to learn to mourn, that being touched with sorrow of conscience
they might cease to flatter themselves and to exult on the verge of destruction. Then laughter is to
be taken as signifying the flattering with which the ungodly deceive themselves, while they are
infatuated by the sweetness of their sins and forget the judgment of God.
10Humble yourselves, or, be ye humbled . The conclusion of what is gone before is, that the
grace of God then be ready to raise us up when he sees that our proud spirits are laid aside. We
emulate and envy, because we desire to be eminent. This is a way wholly unreasonable, for it is
God’s peculiar work to raise up the lowly, and especially those who willingly humble themselves.
Whosoever, then, seeks a firm elevation, let him be cast down under a sense of his own infirmity,
and think humbly of himself. Augustine well observes somewhere, As a tree must strike deep roots
downwards, that it may grow upwards, so every one who has not his soul fixed deep in humility,
exalts himself to his own ruin.
James 4:11-12
11 Ne detrahatis invicem, fratres; qui detrahit
fratri, aut judicat fratrem suum, detrahit legi, et11 Speak not evil one of another, brethren.
He that speaketh evil of his brother, and judgeth
judicat legem; si autem judicas legem, non es
factor legis sed judex.his brother, speaketh evil of the law, and judgeth
the law: but if thou judge the law, thou art not a
doer of the law, but a judge.
12 Unus est legislator, qui potest servare et
perdere: tu, quis es qui judicas alterum?12 There is one lawgiver, who is able to save
and to destroy: who art thou that judgest another?
133 In the seventh verse he seems still to continue military terms, “Set yourselves, therefore, in array under God: stand up
against the devil, and he will flee from you.” It is especially to be observed, that the first thing is to be under the banner and
protection of God, and then we can successfully stand up against the devil: apart from God, we have no power to resist him.
The order in the following verse, the eighth, is worthy of notice, as an example of what is very common in Scripture. The
main thing is first stated, to draw nigh to God: and then the things which are previously necessary, to cleanse their hands and to
purify their hearts — an allusion probably to the practice among the priests of the law, of washing themselves before they engaged
in the service of the temple. They were to wash their hands as though they had been stained with blood, as the crime of murder
had been imputed to them in James 4:2 : and they were to purify their hearts from the covetings and ambitious desires which
they had entertained. Except those things were done they could not draw nigh to God. And further, to draw nigh to God was
necessary before they could set themselves in array under his authority, so that there is a connection between this verse and the
former: the ultimate object, stated first, was submission to God, and to be under his protection; and all that follows was necessary
for that purpose. The regular order would be, Purify your hearts, cleanse your hands, draw nigh to God, and be subject to him.
But this mode of statement, by going backward instead of forward, is to be met with in all parts of Scripture. See on this subject
the Preface  to the third volume of Calvin’s  Commentaries on Jeremiah.
210John Calvin Comm on Catholic Epistles
 
11Speak not evil, or, defame not . We see how much labor James takes in correcting the lust
for slandering. For hypocrisy is always presumptuous, and we are by nature hypocrites, fondly
exalting ourselves by calumniating others. There is also another disease innate in human nature,
that every one would have all others to live according to his own will or fancy. This presumption
James suitably condemns in this passage, that is, because we dare to impose on our brethren our
rule of life. He then takes detraction  as including all the calumnies and suspicious works which
flow from a malignant and perverted judgment. The evil of slandering takes a wide range; but here
he properly refers to that kind of slandering which I have mentioned, that is, when we superciliously
determine respecting the deeds and sayings of others, as though our own morosity were the law,
when we confidently condemn whatever does not please us.
That such presumption is here reproved is evident from the reason that is immediately added,
He that speaketh evil of,  or defames his brother, speaketh evil of, or defames the law . He intimates,
that so much is taken away from the law as one claims of authority over his brethren. Detraction,
then, against the law is opposed to that reverence with which it behooves us to regard it.
Paul handles nearly the same argument in Romans 14 , though on a different occasion. For when
superstition in the choice of meats possessed some, what they thought unlawful for themselves,
they condemned also in others. He then reminded them, that there is but one Lord, according to
whose will all must stand or fall, and at whose tribunal we must all appear. Hence he concludes
that he who judges his brethren according to his own view of things, assumes to himself what
peculiarly belongs to God. But James reproves here those who under the pretense of sanctity
condemned their brethren, and therefore set up their own morosity in the place of the divine law.
He, however, employs the same reason with Paul, that is, that we act presumptuously when we
assume authority over our brethren, while the law of God subordinates us all to itself without
exception. Let us then learn that we are not to judge but according to God’s law.
Thou art not a doer of the law, but a judge . This sentence ought to be thus explained: “When
thou claimest for thyself a power to censure above the law of God thou exemptest thyself from the
duty of obeying the law.” He then who rashly judges his brother; shakes off the yoke of God, for
he submits not to the common rule of life. It is then an argument from what is contrary; because
the keeping of the law is wholly different from this arrogance, when men ascribe to their conceit
the power and authority of the law. It hence follows, that we then only keep the law, when we
wholly depend on its teaching alone and do not otherwise distinguish between good and evil; for
all the deeds and words of men ought to be regulated by it.
Were any one to object and say, that still the saints will be the judges of the world, ( 1 Corinthians
6:2,) the answer is obvious, that this honor does not belong to them according to their own right,
but inasmuch as they are the members of Christ; and that they now judge according to the law, so
that they are not to be deemed judges because they only obediently assent to God as their own judge
and the judge of all. With regard to God he is not to be deemed the doer of the law, because his
righteousness is prior to the law; for the law has flown from the eternal and infinite righteousness
of God as a river from its fountain.
211John Calvin Comm on Catholic Epistles
12There is one lawgiver134 Now he connects the power of saying and destroying with the office
of a lawgiver, he intimates that the whole majesty of God is forcibly assumed by those who claim
for themselves the right of making a law; and this is what is done by those who impose as a law
on others their own nod or will. And let us remember that the subject here is not civil government,
in which the edicts and laws of magistrates have place, but the spiritual government of the soul, in
which the word of God alone ought to bear rule. There is then one God, who has consciences
subjected by right to his own laws, as he alone has in his own hand the power to save and to destroy.
It hence appears what is to be thought of human precepts, which cast the snare of necessity on
consciences. Some indeed would have us to shew modesty, when we call the Pope antichrist, who
exercises tyranny over the souls of men, making himself a lawgiver equal to God. But we learn
from this passage something far more, even that they are the members of Antichrist, who willingly
submit to be thus ensnared, and that they thus renounce Christ, when they connect themselves with
a man that is not only a mortal, but who also extols himself against him. It is, I say, a prevaricating
obedience, rendered to the devil, when we allow any other than God himself to be a lawgiver to
rule our souls.
Who art thou . Some think that they are admonished here to become reprovers of their own
vices, in order that they might begin to examine themselves, and that by finding out that they were
not purer than others, they might cease to be so severe. I think that their own condition is simply
suggested to men, so that they may think how much they are below that dignity which they assumed,
as Paul also says, “Who art thou who judgest another?” ( Romans 14:4 .)
James 4:13-17
13 Age nunc, qui dicitis, Hodie et cras eamus
in civitatem, et transigamus illic annum unum,
et mercemur et lucremur;13 Go to now, ye that say, To day or to
morrow we will go into such a city, and continue
there a year, and buy and sell, and get gain:
14 Qui nescitis quid cras futurum sit; quae
enim est vita nostra? vapor est scilicet ad
exiguum tempus apparens, deinde evanescens:14 Whereas ye know not what shall be  on the
morrow. For what is your life? It is even a
vapour, that appeareth for a little time, and then
vanisheth away.
15 Quum dicere debeatis, Si Dominus
voluerit, et vixerimus, faciemus hoc vel illud.15 For that ye ought  to say, If the Lord will,
we shall live, and do this, or that.
16 Nunc autem gloriamini in superbiis
vestris; omnia gloriatio talis, mala est.16 But now ye rejoice in your boastings: all
such rejoicing is evil.
17 Qui ergo novit facere bonum, nec facit,
peccati reus est.17 Therefore to him that knoweth to do good,
and doeth it not, to him it is sin.
 
134
Griesbach  adds καὶ κριτη 
ς, “and judge,” a reading favored by many MSS. and the versions; and doubtless it makes the
passage more complete, especially as what follows belongs to the judge rather than to the lawgiver, that is, to save or to destroy.
212John Calvin Comm on Catholic Epistles
13Go to now . He condemns here another kind of presumption, that many, who ought to have
depended on God’s providence, confidently settled what they were to do, and arranged their plans
for a long time, as though they had many years at their own disposal, while they were not sure, no
not even of one moment. Solomon also sharply ridicules this kind of foolish boasting, when he
says that
“men settle their ways in their heart,
and the Lord in the mean time rules the tongue.”
(Proverbs 16:1 .)
And it is a very insane thing to undertake to execute what we cannot pronounce with our tongue.
James does not reprove the form of speaking, but rather the arrogance of mind, that men should
forget their own weakness, and speak thus presumptuously; for even the godly, who think humbly
of themselves, and acknowledge that their steps are guided by the will of God, may yet sometimes
say, without any qualifying clause, that they will do this or that. It is indeed right and proper, when
we promise anything as to future time, to accustom ourselves to such words as these, “If it shall
please the Lord,” “If the Lord will permit.” But no scruple ought to be entertained, as though it
were a sin to omit them; for we read everywhere in the Scriptures that the holy servants of God
spoke unconditionally of future things, when yet they had it as a principle fixed in their minds, that
they could do nothing without the permission of God. Then as to the practice of saying, “If the
Lord will or permit,” it ought to be carefully attended to by all the godly.
But James roused the stupidity of those who disregarded God’s providence, and claimed for
themselves a whole year, though they had not a single moment in their own power; the gain which
was afar off they promised to themselves, though they had no possession of that which was before
their feet.
14For what is your life?  He might have checked this foolish license in determining things to
come by many other reasons; for we see how the Lord daily frustrates those presumptuous men
who promise what great things they will do. But he was satisfied with this one argument, who has
promised to thee a life for tomorrow? Canst thou, a dying man, do what thou so confidently resolvest
to do? For he who remembers the shortness of his life, will have his audacity easily checked so as
not to extend too far his resolves. Nay, for no other reason do ungodly men indulge themselves so
much, but because they forget that they are men. By the similitude of vapor , he strikingly shews
that the purposes which are founded only on the present life, are altogether evanescent.
15If the Lord will . A twofold condition is laid down, “If we shall live so long,” and, “If the
Lord will;” because many things may intervene to upset what we may have determined; for we are
blind as to all future events. 135 By will he means not that which is expressed in the law, but God’s
counsel by which he governs all things.
16But now ye rejoice , or, glory . We may learn from these words that James condemned
something more than a passing speech.  Ye rejoice , or, glory , he says, in your empty boastings.
Though they robbed God of his government, they yet flattered themselves; not that they openly set
themselves up as superior to God, though they were especially inflated with confidence in themselves,
but that their minds were inebriated with vanity so as to disregard God. And as warnings of this
kind are usually received with contempt by ungodly men — nay, this answer is immediately given,
135 The words may be rendered thus, “If the Lord will, we shall both live and do this or that.” So that living and doing are both
dependent on God’s will.
213John Calvin Comm on Catholic Epistles
“known to ourselves is what is offered to us, so that there is no need of such a warning;” — he
alleges against them this knowledge in which they gloried, and declares that they sinned the more
grievously, because they did not sin through ignorance, but through contempt.
