---
layout: calvin-chapter
book_id: 2peter
book_name: 彼得后书
chapter: 1
total_chapters: 3
header-img: psalm-bg-mountain.jpg
date: 2026-04-30 20:24
---

CHAPTER 1
2 Peter 1:1-4
1. Simeon Petrus, et servus et apostolus Jesu
Christi, iis quid aequè pretiosam nobiscum sortiti1. Simon Peter, a servant and an apostle of
Jesus Christ, to them that have obtained like
sunt fidem, per justitiam Dei nostri et Servatoris
Jesu Christí,precious faith with us through the righteousness
of God and our Saviour Jesus Christ:
2. Gratia vobis et pax multiplicetur per
cognitionem ( vel, cum cognitione ) Dei et Jesu
Domini nostri;2. Grace and peace be multiplied unto you
through the knowledge of God, and of Jesus our
Lord,
3. Quemadmodum divina ejus potentia omnia
nobis quae spectant ad vitam et pietatem dedit3. According as his divine power hath given
unto us all things that pertain  unto life and
per cognitionem ejus qui vocavit nos propria
gloria et virtute ( vel, per gloriam virtutem ):godliness, through the knowledge of him that
hath called us to glory and virtue:
4. Quibus et maximae pretiosae promissiones
nobis donatae sunt, ut per Haec fieretis divinae4. Whereby are given unto us exceeding great
and precious promises: that by these ye might be
consortes naturae, ubi fugeritis corruptionem quae
in mundo est in concupiscentia.partakers of the divine nature, having escaped
the corruption that is in the world through lust.
 
1.Simon Peter.  Prayer takes the first place at the beginning of this Epistle, and then follows
thanksgiving, by which he excites the Jews to gratitude, lest they should forget what great benefits
they had already received from God's hand. Why he called himself the servant and an apostle of
Jesus Christ , we have elsewhere stated, even because no one is to be heard in the Church, except
he speaks as from the mouth of Christ. But the word servant  has a more general meaning, because
it includes all the ministers of Christ, who sustain any public office in the Church. There was in
229John Calvin Comm on Catholic Epistles
the apostleship a higher rank of honor. He then intimates, that he was not one from the rank of
ministers, but was made by the Lord an apostle, and therefore superior to them. 144
Like precious faith.  This is a commendation of the grace which God had indiscriminately shewed
to all his elect people; for it was no common gift, that they had all been called to one and the same
faith, since faith is the special and chief good of man. But he calls it like or equally  precious,  not
that it is equal in all, but because all possess by faith the same Christ with his righteousness, and
the same salvation. Though then the measure is different, that does not prevent the knowledge of
God from being common to all, and the fruit which proceeds from it. Thus we have a real fellowship
of faith with Peter and the Apostles.
He adds, through the righteousness of God, in order that they might know that they did not
obtain faith through their own efforts or strength, but through God's favor alone. For these things
stand opposed the one to the other, the righteousness of God (in the sense in which it is taken here)
and the merit of man. For the efficient cause of faith is called God's righteousness for this reason,
because no one is capable of conferring it on himself. So the righteousness that is to be understood,
is not that which remains in God, but that which he imparts to men, as in Romans 3:22 . Besides,
he ascribes this righteousness in common to God and to Christ, because it flows from God, and
through Christ it flows down to us. 145
2.Grace and peace.  By grace is designated God’s paternal favor towards us. We have indeed
been once for all reconciled to God by the death of Christ, and by faith we come to the possession
of this so great a benefit; but as we perceive the grace of God according to the measure of our faith,
it is said to increase according to our perception when it becomes more fully known to us.
Peace  is added; for as the beginning of our happiness is when God receives us into favor; so
the more he confirms his love in our hearts, the richer blessing he confers on us, so that we become
happy and prosperous in all things,
Through the knowledge,  literally, in the knowledge ; but the preposition ἐν often means “through”
or “with:” yet both senses may suit the context. I am, however, more disposed to adopt the former.
For the more any one advances in the knowledge of God, every kind of blessing increases also
equally with the sense of divine love. Whosoever then aspires to the full fruition of the blessed life
which is mentioned by Peter, must remember to observe the right way. He connects together at the
same time the knowledge of God and of Christ; because God cannot be rightly known except in
Christ, according to that saying,
“No one knoweth the Father but the Son, and he to whom
the Son will reveal him.” ( Matthew 11:27 )
3.According as his divine power.  He refers to the infinite goodness of God which they had
already experienced, that they might more fully understand it for the future. For he continues the
course of his benevolence perpetually to the end, except when we ourselves break it off by our
unbelief; for he possesses exhaustless power and an equal will to do good. Hence the Apostle justly
144 Simeon, and not Simon, is the name as here given, though a few copies and the Vulg.  have Simon. His name is given both
ways elsewhere; see Luke 5:8 , and Acts 15:14 . Why he called himself Peter in the first Epistle, and Simeon Peter here, does not
appear. — Ed.
145 It has been maintained by many, that the rendering of these words ought to be, “of our God and Savior Jesus Christ,” In
this case the ἐν before “righteousness” would be rendered “in;” for it is more suitable to say that faith is  in than through the
righteousness of Christ. Christ is thus called here God as well as Savior; and so he is called “our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ”
in chapter 3:18 , the article being used in the same manner. — Ed.
230John Calvin Comm on Catholic Epistles
animates the faithful to entertain good hope by the consideration of the former benefits of God. 146
For the same purpose is the amplification which he makes; for he might have spoken more simply,
“As he has freely given us all things.” But by mentioning “divine power,” he rises higher, that is,
that God has copiously unfolded the immense resources of his power. But the latter clause may be
referred to Christ as well as to the Father, but both are suitable. It may however be more fitly applied
to Christ, as though he had said, that the grace which is conveyed to us by him, is an evidence of
divinity, because it could not have done by humanity.
That pertain to life and godliness , or, as to life and godliness . Some think that the present life
is meant here, as godliness follows as the more excellent gift; as though by those two words Peter
intended to prove how beneficent and bountiful God is towards the faithful, that he brought them
to light, that he supplies them with all things necessary for the preservation of an earthly life, and
that he has also renewed them to a spiritual life by adorning them with godliness. But this distinction
is foreign to the mind of Peter, for as soon as he mentioned life, he immediately added godliness,
which is as it were its soul; for God then truly gives us life, when he renews us unto the obedience
of righteousness. So Peter does not speak here of the natural gifts of God, but only mentions those
things which he confers peculiarly on his own elect above the common order of nature. 147
That we are born men, that we are endued with reason and knowledge, that our life is supplied
with necessary support, — all this is indeed from God. As however men, being perverted in their
minds and ungrateful, do not regard these various things, which are called the gifts of nature, among
God's benefits, the common condition of human life is not here referred to, but the peculiar
endowments of the new and Spiritual life, which derive their origin from the kingdom of Christ.
But since everything necessary for godliness and salvation is to be deemed among the supernatural
gifts of God, let men learn to arrogate nothing to themselves, but humbly ask of God whatever they
see they are wanting in, and to ascribe to him whatever good they may have. For Peter here, by
attributing the whole of godliness, and all helps to salvation, to the divine power of Christ, takes
them away from the common nature of men, so that he leaves to us not even the least particle of
any virtue or merit.
Through the knowledge of him . He now describes the manner in which God makes us partakers
of so great blessings, even by making himself known to us by the gospel. For the knowledge of
God is the beginning of life and the first entrance into godliness. In short, spiritual gifts cannot be
given for salvation, until, being illuminated by the doctrine of the gospel, we are led to know God.
But he makes God the author of this knowledge, because we never go to him except when called.
Hence the effectual cause of faith is not the perspicacity of our mind, but the calling of God. And
he speaks not of the outward calling only, which is in itself ineffectual; but of the inward calling,
effected by the hidden power of the Spirit when God not only sounds in our ears by the voice of
man, but draws inwardly our hearts to himself by his own Spirit.
146 The connection here is variously regarded. Our version and Calvin seem to connect this verse with the foregoing, in this
sense, that the Apostle prays for the increase of grace and peace from the consideration of what God had already done, or in
conformity with his previous benefits. Others, perhaps more correctly, view this verse as connected with the 5th, and render ὡς,
“Since,” and the beginning of the 5th verse, “Do ye also for this reason, giving all diligence, add,” etc.; that is, “Since God has
done so great things for you, ye also for this reason ought to be diligent in adding to your faith virtue, etc.” But ὡς and καὶ may
be rendered as and so. See Acts 7:51 . “As his divine power... so for this reason, giving all diligence, add,” etc. — Ed.
147 The order is according to what is common in Scripture; the chief thing is mentioned first, and then that which leads to it.
— Ed.
231John Calvin Comm on Catholic Epistles
To glory and virtue,  or, by his own glory and power . Some copies have ἰδία δόξὟ , “by his own
glory," and it is so rendered by the old interpreter; and this reading I prefer, because the sentence
seems thus to flow better For it was Peter's object expressly to ascribe the whole praise of our
salvation to God, so that we may know that we owe every thing to him. And this is more clearly
expressed by these words, — that he has called us by his own glory and power . However, the other
reading, though more obscure, tends to the same thing; for he teaches us, that we are covered with
shame, and are wholly vicious, until God clothes us with glory and adorns us with virtue. He further
intimates, that the effect of calling in the elect, is to restore to them the glorious image of God, and
to renew them in holiness and righteousness.
4.Whereby are given to us.  It is doubtful whether he refers only to glory and power, or to the
preceding things also. The whole difficulty arises from this, — that what is here said is not suitable
to the glory and virtue which God confers on us; but if we read, “by his own glory and power,”
there will be no ambiguity nor perplexity. For what things have been promised to us by God, ought
to be properly and justly deemed to be the effects of his power and glory. 148
At the same time the copies vary here also; for some have δι ᾿ ὃν, “on account of whom;” so
the reference may be to Christ. Whichsoever of the two readings you choose, still the meaning will
be, that first the promises of God ought to be most highly valued; and, secondly, that they are
gratuitous, because they are offered to us as gifts. And he then shews the excellency of the promises,
that they make us partakers of the divine nature, than which nothing can be conceived better.
For we must consider from whence it is that God raises us up to such a height of honor. We
know how abject is the condition of our nature; that God, then, should make himself ours, so that
all his things should in a manner become our things, the greatness of his grace cannot be sufficiently
conceived by our minds. Therefore this consideration alone ought to be abundantly sufficient to
make us to renounce the world and to carry us aloft to heaven. Let us then mark, that the end of
the gospel is, to render us eventually conformable to God, and, if we may so speak, to deify us.
But the word nature  is not here essence but quality . The Manicheans formerly dreamt that we
are a part of God, and that, after having run the race of life we shall at length revert to our original.
There are also at this day fanatics who imagine that we thus pass over into the nature of God, so
that his swallows up our nature. Thus they explain what Paul says, that God will be all in all ( 1
Corinthians 15:28 ,) and in the same sense they take this passage. But such a delirium as this never
entered the minds of the holy Apostles; they only intended to say that when divested of all the vices
of the flesh, we shall be partakers of divine and blessed immortality and glory, so as to be as it were
one with God as far as our capacities will allow.
148The received text no doubt contains the true rending. The word ἀρετὴ  never means “power” either in the classics, or in the
Sept., or in the New Testament. Beza  and also Schleusner,  regard διὰ as expressing the final cause, to; it is also used in the sense
of “for the sake of,” or, “on account of.” “Glory and virtue” are in a similar order as the previous words, “life and godliness,”
and also in the same order with the concluding words of the next verse, “partakers of the divine nature,” and “escaping the
corruptions of the world.” So that there is a correspondence as to the order of the words throughout the whole passage.
With respect to δι ᾿ ὦν, the rendering may be, “for the sake of which,” that is, for the purpose of leading us to “glory and
virtue,”“ many and precious promises have been given; and then the conclusion of the verse states the object in other words,
that we might by these promises become partakers of the divine nature, having escaped the pollutions of the world. Escaping
the corruption of the world is “godliness,” is “virtue;” and partaking of the divine nature is “life,” is “glory.” This complete
correspondence confirms the meaning which Beza  and our version give to the preposition διὰ at the end of the third verse. —
Ed.
232John Calvin Comm on Catholic Epistles
This doctrine was not altogether unknown to Plato, who everywhere defines the chief good of
man to be an entire conformity to God; but as he was involved in the mists of errors, he afterwards
glided off to his own inventions. But we, disregarding empty speculations, ought to be satisfied
with this one thing, — that the image of God in holiness and righteousness is restored to us for this
end, that we may at length be partakers of eternal life and glory as far as it will be necessary for
our complete felicity.
Having escaped  We have already explained that the design of the Apostle was, to set before us
the dignity of the glory of heaven, to which God invites us, and thus to draw us away from the
vanity of this world. Moreover, he sets the corruption of the world in opposition to the divine nature;
but he shews that this corruption is not in the elements which surround us, but in our heart, because
there vicious and depraved affections prevail, the fountain and root of which he points out by the
word lust. Corruption, then, is thus placed in the world, that we may know that the world is in us.
2 Peter 1:5-9
5. Atque in hoc ipsum omne studium
applicantes, subministrate in fide vestra virtutem,
in virtute autem scientiam;5. And beside this, giving all diligence, add
to your faith virtue; and to virtue knowledge;
6. In scientia verae temperantiam, in
temperantia autem patientiam, in patientia verò
pietatem,6. And to knowledge temperance; and to
temperance patience; and to patience godliness;
7. In pietate autem fraternum amorem, in
fraterno verò amore charitatem.7. And to godliness brotherly kindness; and
to brotherly kindness charity.
8. Haec enim si vobis adsint, et abunde,
suppetant, non otiosos neque infructuosos8. For if these things be in you, and abound,
they make you that ye shall  neither be barren nor
constituent vos in cognitione Domini nostri Jesu
Christi.unfruitful in the knowledge of our Lord Jesus
Christ.
9. Cui enim Haec non adsunt, caecus est,
manu palpans, purgationis oblitus veterum
delictorum.9. But he that lacketh these things is blind,
and cannot see afar off, and hath forgotten that
he was purged from his old sins.
 
5And besides this. As it is a work arduous and of immense labor, to put off the corruption
which is in us, he bids us to strive and make every effort for this purpose. He intimates that no place
is to be given in this case to sloth, and that we ought to obey God calling us, not slowly or carelessly,
but that there is need of alacrity; as though he had said, “Put forth every effort, and make your
exertions manifest to all.” — For this is what the participle he uses imports.
Add to your faith virtue,  or, Supply to your faith virtue . He shews for what purpose the faithful
were to strive, that is, that they might have faith adorned with good morals, wisdom, patience, and
love. Then he intimates that faith ought not to be naked or empty, but that these are its inseparable
companions. To supply to faith, is to add to faith. There is not here, however, properly a gradation
as to the sense, though it appears as to the words; for love does not in order follow patience, nor
233John Calvin Comm on Catholic Epistles
does it proceed from it. Therefore the passage is to be thus simply explained, “Strive that virtue,
prudence, temperance, and the things which follow, may be added to your faith.” 149
I take virtue  to mean a life honest and rightly formed; for it is not here ἐνέργεια , energy or
courage, but ἀρετὴ , virtue, moral goodness. Knowledge is what is necessary for acting prudently;
for after having put down a general term, he mentions some of the principal endowments of a
Christian. Brotherly-kindness, φιλαδελφία , is mutual affection among the children of God. Love
extends wider, because it embraces all mankind.
It may, however, be here asked, whether Peter, by assigning to us the work of supplying or
adding virtue, thus far extolled the strength and power of free-will? They who seek to establish
free-will in man, indeed concede to God the first place, that is, that he begins to act or work in us;
but they imagine that we at the same time co-operate, and that it is thus owing to us that the
movements of God are not rendered void and inefficacious. But the perpetual doctrine of Scripture
is opposed to this delirious notion: for it plainly testifies, that right feelings are formed in us by
God, and are rendered by him effectual. It testifies also that all our progress and perseverance are
from God. Besides, it expressly declares that wisdom, love, patience, are the gifts of God and the
Spirit. When, therefore, the Apostle requires these things, he by no means asserts that they are in
our power, but only shews what we ought to have, and what ought to be done. And as to the godly,
when conscious of their own infirmity, they find themselves deficient in their duty, nothing remains
for them but to flee to God for aid and help. 150
8.For if these things be in you.  Then, he says, you will at length prove that Christ is really
known by you, if ye be endued with virtue, temperance, and the other endowments. For the
knowledge of Christ is an efficacious thing and a living root, which brings forth fruit. For by saying
that these things would make them neither barren nor unfruitful, he shews that all those glory, in
vain and falsely, that they have the knowledge of Christ, who boast of it without love, patience,
and the like gifts, as Paul also says in Ephesians 4:20 ,
“Ye have not so learned Christ, if so be that ye have heard him, and have been taught by him, as
the truth is in Jesus, that ye put off the old man,” etc.
For he means that those who possess Christ without newness of life, have never been rightly
taught his doctrine.
But he would not have the faithful to be only taught patience, godliness, temperance, love; but
he requires a continual progress to be made as to these endowments, and that justly, for we are as
149 Some, like Bishop Warburton , have very ingeniously attempted to shew that there is here a regular order and gradation;
but it is not the order of cause and effect. Different things are mentioned, and what is added, has in some way or another a
connection with the previous word. To faith add virtue or moral conduct; that virtue may be rightly formed, add knowledge; that
knowledge may be gained, add temperance; that temperance may continue, add patience or perseverance; that perseverance may
be retained, add godliness or piety, that is, prayer to God; that godliness may not be alone, add brotherly-kindness; and that
brotherly kindness may he enlarged, add love to all mankind. The word added has a connection with the immediately previous
word, as the way, means, or an addition. — Ed.
150 The question of free-will does not properly belong to this passage; for the Apostle writes, not to those in their natural state,
but to those whom he considered to be new creatures. The question of free-will ought to be confined to conversion, and not
extended to the state of those who have been converted. The tenth article of the Church of England nearly meets the question,
yet not wholly: it ascribes the will to turn most distinctly to God, and says that man cannot turn himself; but it does not expressly
say whether man can resist the good-will given him, which is the very gist of the question. But it says further, that the grace of
God by Christ “worketh with us when we have that good-will,” which seems certainly to imply, that the good-will first given is
made thereby effectual. If there be, then, a cooperation, (as no doubt there is,) it is the cooperation, according to this Article, of
the good-will first given, and not of anything in man by nature. — Ed.
234John Calvin Comm on Catholic Epistles
yet far off from the goal. We ought, therefore, always to make advances, so that God’s gifts may
continually increase in us.
9.But he that lacketh these things.  He now expresses more clearly that they who profess a naked
faith are wholly without any true knowledge. He then says that they go astray like the blind in
darkness, because they do not see the right way which is shewn to us by the light of the gospel. 151
This he also confirms by adding this reason, because such have forgotten that through the benefit
of Christ they had been cleansed from sin, and yet this is the beginning of our Christianity. It then
follows, that those who do not strive for a pure and holy life, do not understand even the first
rudiments of faith.
But Peter takes this for granted, that they who were still rolling in the filth of the flesh had
forgotten their own purgation. For the blood of Christ has not become a washing bath to us, that it
may be fouled by our filth. He, therefore, calls them old sins, by which he means, that our life ought
to be otherwise formed, because we have been cleansed from our sins; not that any one can be pure
from every sin while he lives in this world, or that the cleansing we obtain through Christ consists
of pardon only, but that we ought to differ from the unbelieving, as God has separated us for himself.
Though, then, we daily sin, and God daily forgives us, and the blood of Christ cleanses us from
our sins, yet sin ought not to rule in us, but the sanctification of the Spirit ought to prevail in us;
for so Paul teaches us in 1 Corinthians 6:11 , “And such were some of you; but ye are washed,” etc.
2 Peter 1:10-15
10. Quamobrem magis, fratres, studete
firmam vestram vocationem et electionem facere:
Haec enim si feceritis, non cadetis unquam:10. Wherefore the rather, brethren, give
diligence to make your calling and election sure:
for if ye do these things, ye shall never fall:
11. Sic enim abundè subministrabitur vobis
ingressus in regnum eternum Domini nostri et
Servatoris Jesu Christi.11. For so an entrance shall be ministered
unto you abundantly into the everlasting kingdom
of our Lord and Saviour Jesus Christ.
12. Itaque non negligam semper de iis
commonefacere, etiamsi noveritis, et confirmati
sitis in praesenti veritate.12. Wherefore I will not be negligent to put
you always in remembrance of these things,
though ye know them , and be established in the
present truth.
13. Justum autem arbitror, quandiu sum in
hoc tabernaculo, vos admonitione;13. Yea, I think it meet, as long as I am in
this tabernacle, to stir you up by putting you in
remembrance;
14. Quum sciam brevi me depositurum hoc
tabernaculum, quemadmodum et Dominus Jesus
manifestavit mihi.l4. Knowing that shortly I must put off this
my tabernacle, even as our Lord Jesus Christ hath
shewed me.
151 “He is blind, ( manu palpans ) stroking with the hand,” is Calvin's; the Vulgate  is manu tentans , “feeling with the hand:” but
the original word means, “closing the eyes,” according to the Greek grammarians, Hesychius  and Suidas : “He is blind, closing
his eyes.” — Ed.
235John Calvin Comm on Catholic Epistles
15. Dabo autem operam, ut etiam semper post
meum discessum possitis horum habere
memoriam.15. Moreover I will endeavour that ye may
be able after my decease to have these things
always in remembrance.
 
10.Wherefore the rather, brethren, give diligence.  He draws this conclusion, that it is one proof
that we have been really elected, and not in vain called by the Lord, if a good conscience and
integrity of life correspond with our profession of faith. And he infers, that there ought to be more
labor and diligence, because he had said before, that faith ought not to be barren.
Some copies have, “by good works;” but these words make no change in the sense, for they
are to be understood though not expressed. 152
He mentions calling  first, though the last in order. The reason is, because election is of greater
weight or importance; and it is a right arrangement of a sentence to subjoin what preponderates.
The meaning then is, labor that you may have it really proved that you have not been called nor
elected in vain. At the same time he speaks here of calling as the effect and evidence of election.
If any one prefers to regard the two words as meaning the same thing, I do not object; for the
Scripture sometimes merges the difference which exists between two terms. I have, however, stated
what seems to me more probable. 153
Now a question arises, Whether the stability of our calling and election depends on good works,
for if it be so, it follows that it depends on us. But the whole Scripture teaches us, first, that God's
election is founded on his eternal purpose; and secondly, that calling begins and is completed
through his gratuitous goodness. The Sophists, in order to transfer what is peculiar to God's grace
to ourselves, usually pervert this evidence. But their evasions may be easily refuted. For if any one
thinks that calling is rendered sure by men, there is nothing absurd in that; we may however, go
still farther, that every one confirms his calling by leading a holy and pious life. But it is very foolish
to infer from this what the Sophists contend for; for this is a proof not taken from the cause, but on
the contrary from the sign or the effect. Moreover, this does not prevent election from being
gratuitous, nor does it shew that it is in our own hand or power to confirm election. For the matter
stands thus, — God effectually calls whom he has preordained to life in his secret counsel before
the foundation of the world; and he also carries on the perpetual course of calling through grace
alone. But as he has chosen us, and calls us for this end, that we may be pure and spotless in his
presence; purity of life is not improperly called the evidence and proof of election, by which the
faithful may not only testify to others that they are the children of God, but also confirm themselves
in this confidence, in such a manner, however, that they fix their solid foundation on something
else.
At the same time, this certainty, mentioned by Peter, ought, I think, to be referred to the
conscience, as though the faithful acknowledged themselves before God to be chosen and called.
But I take it simply of the fact itself, that calling appears as confirmed by this very holiness of life.
152There is no sufficient authority for introducing them. Besides, there is no need of them, for the word ταῦτα , “these things,”
has been often previously repeated, and refers to the things mentioned in verses 5, 6, and 7 . — Ed.
153 The order is such as we often meet with, the visible effect first, and then the cause, as in Romans 10:9 ; confession, the
ostensible act, is mentioned first, and then faith, which precedes it. So here, calling, the effect produced, is first mentioned, and
then election, the cause of it; as though he had said, “Make your calling, which has proceeded from your election, sure.” — Ed.
236John Calvin Comm on Catholic Epistles
It may, indeed, be rendered, Labor that your calling may become certain; for the verb ποιεῖσθαι  is
transitive or intransitive. Still, however you may render it, the meaning is nearly the same.
The import of what is said is, that the children of God are distinguished from the reprobate by
this mark, that they live a godly and a holy life, because this is the design and end of election. Hence
it is evident how wickedly some vile unprincipled men prattle, when they seek to make gratuitous
election an excuse for all licentiousness; as though, forsooth! we may sin with impunity, because
we have been predestinated to righteousness and holiness!
For if ye do these things.  Peter seems again to ascribe to the merits of works, that God furthers
our salvation, and also that we continually persevere in his grace. But the explanation is obvious;
for his purpose was only to shew that hypocrites have in them nothing real or solid, and that, on
the contrary, they who prove their calling sure by good works, are free from the danger of falling,
because sure and sufficient is the grace of God by which they are supported. Thus the certainty of
our salvation by no means depends on us, as doubtless the cause of it is beyond our limits. But with
regard to those who feel in themselves the efficacious working of the Spirit, Peter bids them to take
courage as to the future, because the Lord has laid in them the solid foundation of a true and sure
calling.
He explains the way or means of persevering, when he says, an entrance shall be ministered
to you.  The import of the words is this: “God, by ever supplying you abundantly with new graces,
will lead you to his own kingdom.” And this was added, that we may know, that though we have
already passed from death into life, yet it is a passage of hope; and as to the fruition of life, there
remains for us yet a long journey. In the meantime we are not destitute of necessary helps. Hence
Peter obviates a doubt by these words, “The Lord will abundantly supply your need, until you shall
enter into his eternal kingdom.” He calls it the kingdom of Christ,  because we cannot ascend to
heaven except under his banner and guidance.
12.Wherefore I will not be negligent . As we seem to distrust either the memory or the attention
of those whom we often remind of the same thing, the Apostle makes this modest excuse, that he
ceased not to press on the attention of the faithful what was well known and fixed in their minds,
because its importance and greatness required this.
“Ye do, indeed,” he says, “fully understand what the truth of the gospel is, nor have I to confirm
as it were the wavering, but in a matter so great, admonitions are never superfluous; and, therefore,
they ought never to be deemed vexatious.” Paul also employs a similar excuse in Romans 15:14 ,
“I am persuaded of you, brethren,” he says, “that ye are full of knowledge, so as to be able to
admonish one another: but I have more confidently written to you, as putting you in mind.”
He calls that the present truth , into the possession of which they had already entered by a sure
faith. He, then, commends their faith, in order that they might remain fixed in it more firmly.
13.Yea, I think it meet,  or right . He expresses more clearly how useful and how necessary is
admonition, because it is needful to arouse the faithful, for otherwise torpor will creep in from the
flesh. Though, then, they might not have wanted teaching, yet he says that the goads of admonitions
were useful, lest security and indulgence (as it is usually the case) should weaken what they had
learned, and at length extinguish it.
He adds another cause why he was so intent on writing to them, because he knew that a short
time remained for him. “I must diligently employ my time,” he says; “for the Lord has made known
to me that my life in this world will not be long.”
237John Calvin Comm on Catholic Epistles
We hence learn, that admonitions ought to be so given, that the people whom we wish to benefit
may not think that wrong is done to them, and also that offenses ought to be so avoided, that yet
the truth may have a free course, and exhortations may not be discontinued. Now, this moderation
is to be observed towards those to whom a sharp reproof would not be suitable, but who ought on
the contrary to be kindly helped, since they are inclined of themselves to do their duty. We are also
taught by the example of Peter, that the shorter term of life remains to us, the more diligent ought
we to be in executing our office. It is not commonly given to us to foresee our end; but they who
are advanced in years, or weakened by illness, being reminded by such indications of the shortness
of their life, ought to be more sedulous and diligent, so that they may in due time perform what the
Lord has given them to do; nay, those who are the strongest and in the flower of their age, as they
do not render to God so constant a service as it behooves them to do, ought to quicken themselves
to the same care and diligence by the recollection of approaching death; lest the occasion of doing
good may pass away, while they attend negligently and slothfully to their work.
At the same time, I doubt not but that it was Peter’s object to gain more authority and weight
to his teaching, when he said that he would endeavor to make them to remember these things after
his death, which was then nigh at hand. For when any one, shortly before he quits this life, addresses
us, his words have in a manner the force and power of a testament or will, and are usually received
by us with greater reverence.
14I must put off this my tabernacle.  Literally the words are, “Short is the putting; away of this
tabernacle.” By this mode of speaking, and afterwards by the word “departing,” he designates death,
which it behooves us to notice; for we are here taught how much death differs from perdition.
Besides, too much dread of death terrifies us, because we do not sufficiently consider how fading
and evanescent this life is, and do not reflect on the perpetuity of future life. But what does Peter
say? He declares that death is departing from this world, that we may remove elsewhere, even to
the Lord. It ought not, then, to be dreadful to us, as though we were to perish when we die. He
declares that it is the putting away of a tabernacle, by which we are covered only for a short time.
There is, then, no reason why we should regret to be removed from it.
But there is to be understood an implied contrast between a fading tabernacle and a perpetual
habitation, which Paul explains in 2 Corinthians 5:1 . 154
When he says that it had been revealed to him by Christ , he refers not to the kind of death, but
to the time. But if he received the oracle at Babylon respecting his death being near, how was he
crucified at Rome? It certainly appears that he died very far from Italy, except he flew in a moment
over seas and lands. 155 But the Papists, in order to claim for themselves the body of Peter, make
themselves Babylonians, and say that Rome is called Babylon by Peter: this shall be refuted in its
proper place. What he says of remembering these things after his death, was intended to shew, that
posterity ought to learn from him when dead. For the apostles had not regard only for their own
154 Paul, at the beginning of this chapter, compares our state in this world in a fading body with our state above after the
resurrection in a glorified body, and takes no account of the intervening time between death and the resurrection. By keeping
this in view, the whole passage, otherwise obscure, will appear quite clear. He speaks of being unclothed and clothed, that is, of
being divested of one body, and of putting on another; and consistently with this view he speaks of not being found naked, that
is, without a body as a covering. — Ed.
155 It has been disputed, whether he refers here to what is recorded in John 21:18, 19 , or to a new revelation. The latter was
the opinion of some of the ancient fathers; and not without reason, for in John the manner of his death is what is mentioned, but
here the near approach of it, — two things wholly distinct. — Ed.
238John Calvin Comm on Catholic Epistles
age, but purposed to do us good also. Though, then, they are dead, their doctrine lives and prevails:
and it is our duty to profit by their writings, as though they were manifestly present with. us.
2 Peter 1:16-18
16. Neque enim fabulas subtiliter excogitatas
(vel, arte compositas ) sequuti, notam vobis16. For we have not followed cunningly
devised fables, when we made known unto you
fecimus Domini nostri Jesu Christi potentiam et the power and coming of our Lord Jesus Christ,
but were eyewitnesses of his majesty. adventum; sed spectatores facti ejus
magnificentiae.
17. Accepit enim à Deo Patre honorém et
gloriam, allata illi à magnifica gloria hujusmodi17. For he received from God the Father
honour and glory, when there came such a voice
voce, Hie Filius meus dilectus, in quo mihi
complacui.to him from the excellent glory, This is my
beloved Son, in whom I am well pleased.
18. Et hanc vocem nos audivimus, dum
essemus in monte sancto cum illo.18. And this voice which came from heaven
we heard, when we were with him in the holy
mount.
 
16. For we have not followed cunningly devised fables.  It gives us much courage, when we
know that we labor in a matter that is certain. Lest, then, the faithful should think that in these labors
they were beating the air, he now comes to set forth the certainty of the gospel; and he denies that
anything had been delivered by him but what was altogether true and indubitable: and they were
encouraged to persevere, when they were sure of the prosperous issue of their calling.
In the first place, Peter indeed asserts that he had been an eyewitness; for he had himself seen
with his own eyes the glory of Christ, of which he speaks. This knowledge he sets in opposition to
crafty fables, such as cunning men are wont to fabricate to ensnare simple minds. The old interpreter
renders the word “feigned,” ( fictas ;) Erasmus, “formed by art.” It seems to me that what is subtle
to deceive  is meant: for the Greek word here used, σοφίζεσθαι , sometimes means this. And we
know how much labor men bestow on frivolous refinements, and only that they may have some
amusement. Therefore no less seriously ought our minds to be applied to know the truth which is
not fallacious, and the doctrine which is not nugatory, and which discovers to us the glory of the
Son of God and our own salvation. 156
The power and the coming. No doubt he meant in these words to include the substance of the
gospel, as it certainly contains nothing except Christ, in whom are hid all the treasures of wisdom.
But he distinctly mentions two things, — that Christ had been manifested in the flesh, — and also
that power was exhibited by him. 157 Thus, then, we have the whole gospel; for we know that he,
156The verb σοφίσω , once used by Paul in 2 Timothy 3:15 , means “to make wise,” and in this sense it is used in the Sept.; and
it may properly have a similar meaning here, “myths (or, fables) made wise,” or made to appear wise a trade still carried on in
the world. The idea of craft and subtlety is what is given to it in the classics. — Ed.
157 We have the same order as in several previous instances; “power” first, then “coming.” It is the peculiar style of Scripture.
— Ed.
239John Calvin Comm on Catholic Epistles
the long-promised Redeemer, came from heaven, put on our flesh, lived in the world, died and rose
again; and, in the second place, we perceive the end and fruit of all these things, that is, that he
might be God with us, that he might exhibit in himself a sure pledge of our adoption, that he might
cleanse us from the defilement’s of the flesh by the grace of his Spirit, and consecrate us temples
to God, that he might deliver us from hell, and raise us up to heaven, that he might by the sacrifice
of his death make an atonement for the sins of the world, that he might reconcile us to the Father,
that he might become to us the author of righteousness and of life. He who knows and understands
these things, is fully acquainted with the gospel.
Were eyewitnesses,  or beholders158 We hence conclude, that they by no means serve Christ,
nor are like the apostles, who presumptuously mount the pulpit to prattle of speculations unknown
to themselves; for he alone is the lawful minister of Christ, who knows the truth of the doctrine
which he delivers: not that all obtain certainty in the same way; for what Peter says is that he himself
was present, when Christ was declared by a voice from heaven to be the Son of God. Three only
were then present, but they were sufficient as witnesses; for they had through many miracles seen
the glory of Christ, and had a remarkable evidence of his divinity in his resurrection. But we now
obtain certainty in another way; for though Christ has not risen before our eyes, yet we know by
whom his resurrection has been handed down to us. And added to this is the inward testimony of
conscience, the sealing of the Spirit, which far exceeds all the evidence of the senses. But let us
remember that the gospel was not at the beginning made up of vague rumors, but that the apostles
were the authentic preachers of what they had seen.
17.For he received from God the Father.  He chose one memorable example out of many, even
that of Christ, when, adorned with celestial glory, he conspicuously displayed his divine majesty
to his three disciples. And though Peter does not relate all the circumstances, yet he sufficiently
designates them when he says, that a voice came from the magnificent glory.  For the meaning is,
that nothing earthly was seen there, but that a celestial majesty shone on every side. We may hence
conclude what those displays of greatness were which the evangelists relate. And it was necessarily
thus done, in order that the authority of that voice which came might be more awful and solemn,
as we see that it was done all at once by the Lord. For when he spoke to the fathers, he did not only
cause his words to sound in the air, but by adding some symbols or tokens of his presence, he
proved the oracles to be his.
This is my beloved Son.  Peter then mentions this voice, as though it was sufficient alone, as a
full evidence for the gospel, and justly so. For when Christ is acknowledged by us to be him whom
the Father has sent, this is our highest wisdom. There are two parts to this sentence. When he says,
“This is,” the expression is very emphatical, intimating, that he was the Messiah who had been so
often promised. Whatever, then, is found in the Law and the Prophets respecting the Messiah, is
declared here, by the Father, to belong to him whom he so highly commended. In the other part of
the sentence, he announces Christ as his own Son, in whom his whole love dwells and centres. It
hence follows that we are not otherwise loved than in him, nor ought the love of God to be sought
anywhere else. It is sufficient for me now only to touch on these things by the way.
18.In the holy mount.  He calls it the holy mount , for the same reason that the ground was called
holy where God appeared to Moses. For wherever the Lord comes, as he is the fountain of all
158Spectators, ἐπόπται , lookers on, inspectors, surveyors — it betokens those who not only see or behold a thing, but who
attentively look on. It is more emphatical than αὐτόπται , “eye-witnesses.” — Ed.
240John Calvin Comm on Catholic Epistles
holiness, he makes holy all things by the odor of his presence. And by this mode of speaking we
are taught, not only to receive God reverently wherever he shews himself, but also to prepare
ourselves for holiness, as soon as he comes nigh us, as it was commanded the people when the law
was proclaimed on Mount Sinai. And it is a general truth,
“Be ye holy, for I am holy, who dwell in the midst of you.”
(Leviticus 11:44; 19:2 .)
2 Peter 1:19-21
19. Et habemus firmiorem propheticum
sermonem, cui bene facitis attendentes, tanquam19. We have also a more sure word of
prophecy; whereunto ye do well that ye take
lucernae apparenti in caliginoso loco, donee
illuceat dies, et lucifer oriatur in cordibus vestris;heed, as unto a light that shineth in a dark place,
until the day dawn, and the day star arise in your
hearts:
20. Hoc primùm cognito, quòd omnis
prophetia scripturae privatae ( vel, proprii motus )
interpretationis non est:20. Knowing this first, that no prophecy of
the scripture is of any private interpretation.
21. Neque enim voluntate hominis allata est
quondam prophetia; sed à Spiritu Sancto impulsi,
loquuti sunt sancti Dei homines.21. For the prophecy came not in old time by
the will of man: but holy men of God spake as
they were  moved by the Holy Ghost.
 
19.We have also. He now shews that the truth of the gospel is founded on the oracles of the
prophets, lest they who embraced it should hesitate to devote themselves wholly to Christ: for they
who waver cannot be otherwise than remiss in their minds. But when he says, “We have,” he refers
to himself and other teachers, as well as to their disciples. The apostles had the prophets as the
patrons of their doctrine; the faithful also sought from them a confirmation of the gospel. I am the
more disposed to take this view, because he speaks of the whole Church, and makes himself one
among others. At the same time, he refers more especially to the Jews, who were well acquainted
with the doctrine of the prophets. And hence, as I think, he calls their word more sure  or firmer
For they who take the comparative for a positive, that is, “more sure,” for “sure,” do not
sufficiently consider the whole context. The sense also is a forced one, when it is said to be “more
sure,” because God really completed what he had promised concerning his Son. For the truth of
the gospel is here simply proved by a twofold testimony, — that Christ had been highly approved
by the solemn declaration of God, and, then, that all the prophecies of the prophets confirmed the
same thing. But it appears at first sight strange, that the word of the prophets should be said to be
more sure or firmer than the voice which came from the holy mouth of God himself; for, first, the
authority of God's word is the same from the beginning; and, secondly, it was more confirmed than
previously by the coming of Christ. But the solution of this knot is not difficult: for here the Apostle
had a regard to his own nation, who were acquainted with the prophets, and their doctrine was
received without any dispute. As, then, it was not doubted by the Jews but that all the things which
the prophets had taught, came from the Lord, it is no wonder that Peter said that their word was
241John Calvin Comm on Catholic Epistles
more sure. Antiquity also gains some reverence. There are, besides, some other circumstances
which ought to be noticed; particularly, that no suspicion could be entertained as to those prophecies
in which the kingdom of Christ had so long before been predicted.
The question, then, is not here, whether the prophets deserve more credit than the gospel; but
Peter regarded only this, to shew how much deference the Jews paid to those who counted the
prophets as God's faithful ministers, and had been brought up from childhood in their school. 159
Whereunto ye do well.  This passage is, indeed, attended with some more difficulty; for it may
be asked, what is the day which Peter mentions? To some it seems to be the clear knowledge of
Christ, when men fully acquiesce in the gospel; and the darkness  they explain as existing, when
they, as yet, hesitate in suspense, and the doctrine of the gospel is not received as indubitable; as
though Peter praised those Jews who were searching for Christ in the Law and the Prophets, and
were advancing, as by this preceding light towards Christ, the Sun of righteousness, as they were
praised by Luke, who, having heard Paul preaching, searched the Scripture to know whether what
he said was true. ( Acts 17:11 )
But in this view there is, first, an inconsistency, because it thus seems that the use of the
prophecies is confined to a short time, as though they would be superfluous when the gospel-light
is seen. Were one to object and say, that this does not necessarily follow, because until does not
always denote the end. To this I say, that in commands it cannot be otherwise taken: “Walk until
you finish your course;” “Fight until you conquer.” In such expressions we doubtless see that a
certain time is specified. 160 But were I to concede this point, that the reading of the prophets is not
thus wholly cast aside; yet every one must see how frigid is this commendation, that the prophets
are useful until Christ is revealed to us; for their teaching is necessary to us until the end of life.
Secondly, we must bear in mind who they were whom Peter addressed; for he was not instructing
the ignorant and novices, who were as yet in the first rudiments; but even those respecting whom
he had before testified, that they had obtained the same precious faith, and were confirmed in the
present truth. Surely the gross darkness of ignorance could not have been ascribed to such people.
I know what some allege, that all had not made the same progress, and that here beginners who
were as yet seeking Christ, are admonished.
But as it is evident from the context, that the words were addressed to the same persons, the
passage must necessarily be applied to the faithful who had already known Christ, and had become
partakers of the true light. I therefore extend this darkness, mentioned by Peter, to the whole course
of life, and the day,  I consider will then shine  on us when we shall see face to face, what we now
see through a glass darkly. Christ, the Sun of righteousness, indeed, shines forth in the gospel; but
159 Much has been written on this subject; and the difficulty has arisen from a wrong construction of the passage, which is
literally as follows: — “And we have more firm the prophetic word,” Καὶ ἔχομεν βεβαιότερον τὸν προφητικὸν λόγον , that is,
we have rendered more firm the prophetic word. This is confirmed by what follows; for the prophetic word is compared to “a
light shining in a dark place,” and, therefore, not clear nor firm until it be fulfilled; but they were doing well to attend to this
light until the full light of the gospel shone in their hearts. As  Scott  maintains, the reference here is clearly to the experience of
Christians to their real knowledge of divine truths; for it was to be in their hearts , and not before  their eyes
A great deal of learning has been spent to no purpose on this passage. It has been by most taken as granted, that “the power
and coming of our Lord,” mentioned in verse 16th
, is his second coming, when the whole passage refers only and expressly to
his first coming. And on this gratuitous and even false supposition is grounded the elaborate exposition of Sherlock, Horsley ,
and others. — Ed.
160 There is no command here: the Apostle only approves of what they were doing, “whereunto ye do well that ye take heed.”
— Ed.
242John Calvin Comm on Catholic Epistles
the darkness of death will always, in part, possess our minds, until we shall be brought out of the
prison of the flesh, and be translated into heaven. This, then, will be the brightness of day, when
no clouds or mists of ignorance shall intercept the bright shining of the Sun.
And doubtless we are so far from a perfect day, as our faith is from perfection. It is, therefore,
no wonder that the state of the present life is called darkness, since we are far distant from that
knowledge to which the gospel invites us. 161
In short, Peter reminds us that as long as we sojourn in this world, we have need of the doctrine
of the prophets as a guiding light; which being extinguished, we can do nothing else but wander in
darkness; for he does not disjoin the prophecies from the gospel, when he teaches us that they shine
to shew us the way. His object only was to teach us that the whole course of our life ought to be
guided by God's word; for otherwise we must be involved on every side in the darkness of ignorance;
and the Lord does not shine on us, except when we take his word as our light.
But he does not use the comparison, light,  or lamp, to intimate that the light is small and sparing,
but to make these two things to correspond,--that we are without light, and can no more keep on
the right way than those who go astray in a dark night; and that the Lord brings a remedy for this
evil, when he lights a torch to guide us in the midst of darkness.
What he immediately adds respecting  the day star  does not however seem altogether suitable
to this explanation; for the real knowledge, to which we are advancing through life, cannot be called
the beginning of the day. To this I reply, that different parts of the day are compared together, but
the whole day in all its parts is set in opposition to that darkness, which would wholly overspread
all our faculties, were not the Lord to come to our help by the light of his word.
This is a remarkable passage: we learn from it how God guides us. The Papists have ever and
anon in their mouth, that the Church cannot err. Though the word is neglected, they yet imagine
that it is guided by the Spirit. But Peter, on the contrary, intimates that all are immersed in darkness
who do not attend to the light of the word. Therefore, except thou art resolved wilfully to cast
thyself into a labyrinth, especially beware of departing even in the least thing from the rule and
direction of the word. Nay, the Church cannot follow God as its guide, except it observes what the
word prescribes.
In this passage Peter also condemns all the wisdom of men, in order that we may learn humbly
to seek, otherwise than by our own understanding, the true way of knowledge; for without the word
nothing is left for men but darkness.
It further deserves to be noticed, that he pronounces on the clearness of Scripture; for what is
said would be a false eulogy, were not the Scripture fit and suitable to shew to us with certainty
the right way. Whosoever, then, will open his eyes through the obedience of faith, shall by experience
know that the Scripture has not been in vain called a light. It is, indeed, obscure to the unbelieving;
but they who are given up to destruction are wilfully blind. Execrable, therefore, is the blasphemy
of the Papists, who pretend that the light of Scripture does nothing but dazzle the eyes, in order to
keep the simple from reading it. But it is no wonder that proud men, inflated with the wind of false
confidence, do not see that light with which the Lord favors only little children and the humble.
With a similar eulogy David commends the law of God in Psalms 19 and 119 .
161 The Apostle does not speak of the perfect day, but of the dawn of it, and the daystar is that which ushers in the perfect day.
The gospel is the dawn and the daystar, compared with the glimmering light of prophecy, and compared too with the perfect
day of the heavenly kingdom. Prophecy is useful still; for its fulfillment, found in the gospel, greatly strengthens faith. — Ed.
243John Calvin Comm on Catholic Epistles
20.Knowing this first.  Here Peter begins to shew how our minds are to be prepared, if we really
wish to make progress in scriptural knowledge. There may at the same time be two interpretations
given, if you read ἐπηλύσεως  as some do, which means occurrence , impulse ; or, as I have rendered
it, interpretation , ἐπιλύσεως . But almost all give this meaning, that we ought not to rush on headlong
and rashly when we read Scripture, confiding in our own understanding. They think that a
confirmation of this follows, because the Spirit, who spoke by the prophets, is the only true interpreter
of himself.
This explanation contains a true, godly, and useful doctrine, that then only are the prophecies
read profitably, when we renounce the mind and feelings of the flesh, and submit to the teaching
of the Spirit, but that it is an impious profanation of it; when we arrogantly rely on our own acumen,
deeming that sufficient to enable us to understand it, though the mysteries contain things hidden
to our flesh, and sublime treasures of life far surpassing our capacities. And this is what we have
said, that the light which shines in it, comes to the humble alone.
But the Papists are doubly foolish, when they conclude from this passage, that no interpretation
of a private man ought to be deemed authoritative. For they pervert what Peter says, that they may
claim for their own councils the chief right of interpreting Scripture; but in this they act indeed
childishly; for Peter calls interpretation private,  not that of every individual, in order to prohibit
each one to interpret; but he shews that whatever men bring of their own is profane. Were, then,
the whole world unanimous, and were the minds of all men united together, still what would proceed
from them, would be private or their own; for the word is here set in opposition to divine revelation;
so that the faithful, inwardly illuminated by the Holy Spirit, acknowledge nothing but what God
says in his word.
However, another sense seems to me more simple, that Peter says that Scripture came not from
man, or through the suggestions of man. For thou wilt never come well prepared to read it, except
thou bringest reverence, obedience, and docility; but a just reverence then only exists when we are
convinced that God speaks to us, and not mortal men. Then Peter especially bids us to believe the
prophecies as the indubitable oracles of God, because they have not emanated from men's own
private suggestions. 162
To the same purpose is what immediately follows, —
But holy men of God spake as they were moved by the Holy Ghost.  They did not of themselves,
or according to their own will, foolishly deliver their own inventions. The meaning is, that the
162 There are in the main three renderings of this passage: — l. “No Prophecy of Scripture is of a private impulse,” or invention;
— 2. “No prophecy of Scripture is of self-interpretation,” that is, is its own interpreter; — 3. No prophecy of Scripture is of
private interpretation, that is, is not to be interpreted according to the fancies of men, but according to the word of God and the
guidance of his Spirit. Now which of these corresponds with the context? Clearly the first, the two others have nothing in the
passage to countenance them. The next verse is evidently explanatory of this sentence, which seems at once to determine its
meaning; and, as it is often the case in Scripture, the explanation is given negatively and positively. Prophecy did not  come from
the will of man; it did come from the Spirit of God. Besides, the importance attached to the announcement, “knowing this
especially,” is not so clearly borne out as by the first exposition, because the fact that prophecy did not come from man, is
everything in the question, while the other expositions contain only things of subordinate importance. Thus what goes before
and comes after tends to confirm the same view.
Whether we take the conjectural reading (which only differs from the other in one small letter) or that which is found in all
the MSS., it may admit of the meaning that has been given. There is either an ἐκ, “from,” understood, or the word prophecy  is
to be repeated: “No prophecy of Scripture is from  one's own explanation;” or, “No prophecy of Scripture is a prophecy  of one's
own explanation,” or interpretation, that is, as to things to come.
Calvin  has been followed in his view of this passage, among others, by Grotius, Doddridge , and Macknight . — Ed.
244John Calvin Comm on Catholic Epistles
beginning of right knowledge is to give that credit to the holy prophets which is due to God. He
calls them the holy men of God,  because they faithfully executed the office committed to them,
having sustained the person of God in their ministrations. He says that they were — not that they
were bereaved of mind, (as the Gentiles imagined their prophets to have been,) but because they
dared not to announce anything of their own, and obediently followed the Spirit as their guide, who
ruled in their mouth as in his own sanctuary. Understand by prophecy of Scripture  that which is
contained in the holy Scriptures.
