---
layout: calvin-chapter
book_id: 2peter
book_name: 彼得后书
chapter: 2
total_chapters: 3
header-img: psalm-bg-mountain.jpg
date: 2026-04-30 20:24
---

CHAPTER 2
2 Peter 2:1-3
1. Fuerunt autem et falsi prophetae in populo,
sicuti et inter vos erunt falsi doctores, qui1. But there were false prophets also among
the people, even as there shall be false teachers
subinducent sectas perditionis, et etiam Dominum among you, who privily shall bring in damnable
qui eos redemit abnegantes, accersentes sibi
celerem interitum.heresies, even denying the Lord that bought them,
and bring upon themselves swift destruction.
2. Et multi sequentur eorum exitia, per quos
via veritatis blasphemabitur;2. And many shall follow their pernicious
ways; by reason of whom the way of truth shall
be evil spoken of.
3. Et in avaritia fictis sermonibus de vobis
negotiabuntur; quorum judicium pridem non
cessat, et quorum perditio non dormitat.3. And through covetousness shall they with
feigned words make merchandise of you: whose
judgment now of a long time lingereth not, and
their damnation slumbereth not.
 
1.But there were.  As weak consciences are usually very grievously and dangerously shaken,
when false teachers arise, who either corrupt or mutilate the doctrine of faith, it was necessary for
the Apostle, while seeking to encourage the faithful to persevere, to remove out of the way an
offense of this kind. He, moreover, comforted those to whom he was writing, and confirmed them
by this argument, that God has always tried and proved his Church by such a temptation as this, in
order that novelty might not disturb their hearts. “Not different,” he says, “will be the condition of
the Church under the gospel, from what it was formerly under the law; false prophets disturbed the
ancient Church; the same thing must also be expected by us.”
It was necessary expressly to shew this, because many imagined that the Church would enjoy
tranquillity under the rein of Christ; for as the prophets had promised that at his coming there would
be real peace, the highest degree of heavenly wisdom, and the full restoration of all things, they
thought that the Church would be no more exposed to any contests. Let us then remember that the
Spirit of God hath once for all declared, that the Church shall never be free from this intestine evil;
and let this likeness be always borne in mind, that the trial of our faith is to be similar to that of the
fathers, and for the same reason — that in this way it may be made evident, whether we really love
God, as we find it written in Deuteronomy 13:3 .
245John Calvin Comm on Catholic Epistles
But it is not necessary here to refer to every example of this kind; it is enough, in short, to know
that, like the fathers, we must contend against false doctrines, that our faith ought by no means to
be shaken on account of discords and sects, because the truth of God shall remain unshaken
notwithstanding the violent agitations by which Satan strives often to upset all things.
Observe also, that no one time in particular is mentioned by Peter, when he says there shall be
false teachers , but that all ages are included; for he makes here a comparison between Christians
and the ancient people. We ought, then, to apply this truth to our own time, lest, when we see false
teachers rising up to oppose the truth of God, this trial should break us down. But the Spirit reminds
us, in order that we may take the more heed; and to the same purpose is the whole description which
follows.
He does not, indeed, paint each sect in its own colors, but particularly refers to profane men
who manifested contempt towards God. The advice, indeed, is general, that we ought to beware of
false teachers; but, at the same time, he selected one kind of such from whom the greater danger
arose. What is said here will hereafter become more evident from the words of Jude, [ Jude 1:4 ,]
who treats exactly of the same subject.
Who privily shall bring in.  By these words he points out the craftiness of Satan, and of all the
ungodly who militate under his banner, that they would creep in by oblique turnings, as through
burrows under ground. 163 The more watchful, then, ought the godly to be, so that they may escape
their hidden frauds: for however they may insinuate themselves, they cannot circumvent those who
are carefully vigilant.
He calls them opinions of perdition,  or destructive opinions , that every one, solicitous for his
salvation, might dread such opinions as the most noxious pests. As to the word  opinions or heresies,
it has not, without reason, been always deemed infamous and hateful by the children of God; for
the bond of holy unity is the simple truth. As soon as we depart from that, nothing remains but
dreadful discord.
Even denying the Lord that bought them. Though Christ may be denied in various ways, yet
Peter, as I think, refers here to what is expressed by Jude, that is, when the grace of God is turned
into lasciviousness; for Christ redeemed us, that he might have a people separated from all the
pollutions of the world, and devoted to holiness and innocency. They, then, who throw off the
bridle, and give themselves up to all kinds of licentiousness, are not unjustly said to deny Christ
by whom they have been redeemed. Hence, that the doctrine of the gospel may remain whole and
complete among us, let this be fixed in our minds, that we have been redeemed by Christ, that he
may be the Lord of our life and of our death, and that our main object ought to be, to live to him
and to die to him. He then says, that their swift destruction  was at hand, lest others should be
ensnared by them. 164
2.And many shall follow . It is, indeed, no slight offense to the weak, when they see that false
doctrines are received by the common consent of the world, that a large number of men are led
astray, so that few continue in true obedience to Christ. So, at this day, there is nothing that more
violently disturbs pious minds than such a defection. For hardly one in ten of those who have once
163 “Peter intimated that the heresies of which he speaks were to be introduced under the color of true doctrine, in the dark. as
it were, and by little and little; so that the people would not discern their real nature.” — Macknight.
164The word here for “Lord” is δεσπότης , which is more expressive of power and authority than Κύριος , commonly rendered
“Lord.” This seems to intimate the character of the men alluded to: they denied Christ as their sovereign, as they rendered no
obedience to him, though they may have professed to believe in him as a Savior. — Ed
246John Calvin Comm on Catholic Epistles
made a profession of Christ, retains the purity of faith to the end. Almost all turn aside into
corruptions, and being deluded by the teachers of licentiousness, they become profane. Lest this
should make our faith to falter, Peter comes to our help, and in due time foretells that this very
thing would be, that is, that false teachers would draw many to perdition.
But there is a double reading even in the Greek copies; for some read, “lasciviousness,” and
others, “perdition.” I have, however, followed what has been mostly approved. 165
By reason of whom the way of truth.  This I consider to have been said for this reason, because
as religion is adorned when men are taught to fear God, to maintain uprightness of life, a chaste
and virtuous conduct, or when at least the mouth of the wicked is closed, that they do not speak
evil of the gospel; so when the reins are let loose, and every kind of licentiousness is practiced, the
name and the doctrine of Christ are exposed to the reproaches of the ungodly. Others give a different
explanation — that these false teachers, like filthy dogs, barked at sound doctrine. But the words
of Peter appear to me on the contrary to intimate, that these would give occasion to enemies insolently
to assail the truth of God. Though then they would not themselves assail the Christian faith with
calumnies, yet they would arm others with the means of reproaching it.
3.With feigned words.  Peter endeavors by all means to render the faithful displeased with
ungodly teachers, that they might resist them more resolutely and more constantly. It is especially
an odious thing that we should be exposed to sale like vile slaves. But he testifies that this is done,
when any one seduces us from the redemption of Christ. He calls those feigned words  which are
artfully formed for the purpose of deceiving. 166 Unless then one is so mad as to sell the salvation
of his soul to false teachers, let him close up every avenue that may lead to their wicked inventions.
For the same purpose as before he repeats again, that their destruction delayed not, that is, that he
might frighten the good from their society. For since they were given up to a sudden destruction,
every one who connected himself with them, must have perished with them.
2 Peter 2:4-8
4. Si enim Angelis qui peccaverant, Deus non
perpercit, sed catenis caliginis in tartarum
praecipitatos tradidit servandos in judicium;4. For if God spared not the angels that
sinned, but cast them  down to hell, and delivered
them  into chains of darkness, to be reserved unto
judgment;
165 Few copies have “perdition,” or perditions, for the word is in the plural number; and very many have “lasciviousness,” and
also the Vulg . and Syr. versions. Having before mentioned their destructive opinions or heresies, which involved the denial of
the Lord who bought them, he now refers to the immorality which accompanied their false doctrines; and that immorality is here
referred to is evident from this, that the way of truth would be evil spoken of or calumniated. — Ed.
166Either “feigned” or “invented” may be meant by πλαστοῖς : if “feigned,” then they were words used not conveying their
real sentiments, but adopted for the purpose of alluring others, as is the case with those who pretend great zeal for truth and great
love for souls, when their object is to gain adherents for filthy lucre’s sake. But if “invented” be adopted, then λόγοι  must mean
narratives or fables, — “invented (or fictitious) fables,” or tales. And this is the rendering of Macknight.  And he says, that the
Apostle had probably in view the fables concerning the visions of angels and the miracles performed at the sepulchres of departed
saints, which the false teachers in the early ages, and the monks in latter times, fabricated, to draw money from the people.
Similar are the devices of superstitious men, greedy of gain, in every age. — Ed.
247John Calvin Comm on Catholic Epistles
5. Et prisco mundo non pepercit, sed octavum
justitiae praeconem Noe servavit, diluvio in
mundum impiorum inducto;5. And spared not the old world, but saved
Noah the eighth person , a preacher of
righteousness, bringing in the flood upon the
world of the ungodly;
6. Et civitates Sodomorum et Gomorrae in
cinerem redactas, subversione damnavit, easque
statuit exemplum iis qui impia acturi forent;6. And turning the cities of Sodom and
Gomorrha into ashes, condemned them  with an
overthrow, making them  an ensample unto those
that after should live ungodly;
7. Et justum Lot qui opprimebatur à nefariis
per libidinosam conversationem eripuit;7. And delivered just Lot, vexed with the
filthy conversation of the wicked:
8. Nam oculis et auribus justus ille, quum
habitaret inter ipsos quotidie animam justam
iniquis illorum operibus excruciabat;8. (For that righteous man dwelling among
them, in seeing and hearing, vexed his righteous
soul from day to day with their  unlawful deeds;)
 
4. For if.  We have stated how much it behoves us to know that the ungodly, who by their
mischievous opinions corrupt the Church, cannot escape God’s vengeance; and this he proves
especially by three remarkable examples of God's judgment, — that he spared not even angels, that
he once destroyed the whole world by a deluge, that he reduced Sodom to ashes, and other
neighboring cities. But Peter thought it sufficient to take as granted what ought to be never doubted
by us, that is, that God is the judge of the whole world. It hence follows that the punishment he
formerly inflicted on the ungodly and wicked, he will now also inflict on the like characters. For
he can never be unlike himself, nor does he shew respect of persons, so as to forgive the same
wickedness in one which he has punished in another; but he hates injustice and wrong equally,
whenever it is found. 167
For we must always bear in mind that there is a difference between God and men; for men
indeed judge unequally, but God keeps the same course in judging. For that he forgives sins, this
is done because he blots them out through repentance and faith. He therefore does not otherwise
reconcile himself to us than by justifying us; for until sin is taken away, there is always an occasion
of discord between us and Him.
As to the angels.  The argument is from the greater to the less; for they were far more excellent
than we are, and yet their dignity did not preserve them from the hand of God; much less then can
mortal men escape, when they follow them in their impiety. But as Peter mentions here but briefly
the fall of angels, and as he has not named the time and the manner and other circumstances, it
behoves us soberly to speak on the subject. Most men are curious and make no end of inquiries on
these things; but since God in Scripture has only sparingly touched on them, and as it were by the
way, he thus reminds us that we ought to be satisfied with this small knowledge. And indeed they
who curiously inquire, do not regard edification, but seek to feed their souls with vain speculations.
167 The “if” at the beginning of the verse requires a corresponding clause. Some, as Piscator  and Macknight , supply at the end
of the seventh verse , “he will not spare thee,” or, “will he spare thee?” But there is no need of this, the corresponding clause is
in the ninth verse ; and this is our version. The deliverance of the just is there first mentioned, as that of Lot was the subject of
the previous verse, and then the reservation of the unjust for judgment, examples of which he had before given. This sort of
arrangement is common in Scripture. — Ed.
248John Calvin Comm on Catholic Epistles
What is useful to us, God has made known, that is, that the devils were at first created, that they
might serve and obey God, but that through their own fault they apostatized, because they would
not submit to the authority of God; and that thus the wickedness found in them was accidental, and
not from nature, so that it could not be ascribed to God.
All this Peter declares very clearly, when he says that angels fell, though superior to men; and
Jude is still more express when he writes, that they kept not their first estate, or their pre-eminence.
[Jude 1:6 .] Let those who are not satisfied with these testimonies have recourse to the Sorbonian
theology, which will teach them respecting angels to satiety, so as to precipitate them to hell together
with the devils.
Chains of darkness.  This metaphor intimates that they are held bound in darkness until the last
day. And the comparison is taken from malefactors, who, after having been condemned, suffer half
of their punishment by the severity of the prison, until they are drawn forth to their final doom. We
may hence learn, not only what punishment the wicked suffer after death, but also what is the
condition of the children of God: for they calmly acquiesce in the hope of sure and perfect
blessedness, though they do not as yet enjoy it; as the former suffer dreadful agonies on account
of the vengeance prepared for them.
5.The old world.  The import of what he says is, that God, after having drowned the human
race, formed again as it were a new world. This is also an argument from the greater to the less;
for how can the wicked escape the deluge of divine wrath, since the whole world was once destroyed
by it? For by saying that eight only were saved, he intimates that a multitude would not be a shield
against God to protect the wicked; but that as many as sin shall be punished, be they few or many
in number.
But it may be asked why he calls Noah the preacher of righteousness.  Some understand that
he was the preacher of the righteousness of God, inasmuch as Scripture commends God's
righteousness, because he defends his own and restores them, when dead, to life. But I rather think
that he is called the preacher of righteousness, because he labored to restore a degenerated world
to a sound mind, and this not only by his teaching and godly exhortations, but also by his anxious
toil in building the ark for the term of a hundred and twenty years. Now, the design of the Apostle
is to set before our eyes God’s wrath against the wicked, so as to encourage us at the same time to
imitate the saints. 168
6The cities of Sodom.  This was so memorable an example of Divine vengeance, that when the
Scripture speaks of the universal destruction of the ungodly, it alludes commonly to this as the
type. Hence Peter says, that these cities were made an example. This may, indeed, be truly said of
others; but Peter points out something singular, because it was the chief and a lively image; yea,
rather, because the Lord designed that his wrath against the ungodly should be made known to all
ages; as when he redeemed his people from Egypt, he has set forth to us by that one favor the
perpetual safety of his Church. Jude has also expressed the same thing, calling it the punishment
of eternal fire. [ Jude 1:7 .]
168 There is a difference of opinion as to the word “eighth:” some think that the sense is, that Noah was the eighth person who
was saved at the deluge, being one of the eight who were preserved. Others render the words, “Noah, the eighth preacher of
righteousness,” calculating from Enos, in whose time as it is said, “men began to call upon the name of the Lord.” ( Genesis
4:26.) Lightfoot  and some others, have held the latter opinion, though the former has been more generally approved. — Ed.
249John Calvin Comm on Catholic Epistles
8.In seeing and hearing.  The common explanation is, that Lot was just in his eyes and ears,
because all his senses abhorred the crimes of Sodom. However, another view may be taken of his
seeing and hearing , so as to make this the meaning, that when the just man lived among the
Sodomites, he tormented his soul by seeing and hearing; for we know that he was constrained to
see and hear many things which greatly vexed his mind. The purport of what is said then is, that
though the holy man was surrounded with every kind of monstrous wickedness, he yet never turned
aside from his upright course.
But Peter expresses more than before, that is, that just Lot underwent voluntary sorrows; as it
is right that all the godly should feel no small grief when they see the world rushing into every kind
of evil, so the more necessary it is that they should groan for their own sins. And Peter expressly
mentioned this, lest when impiety everywhere prevails, we should be captivated and inebriated by
the allurements of vices, and perish together with others, but that we might prefer this grief, blessed
by the Lord, to all the pleasures of the world.
2 Peter 2:9-11
9. Novit Dominus pios ex tentatione eripere;
injustos autem in diem judicii puniendos servare;9. The Lord knoweth how to deliver the godly
out of temptations, and to reserve the unjust unto
the day of judgment to be punished:
10. Praesertim verò eos qui post carnem in
concupiscentia pollutionis ambulant,10. But chiefly them that walk after the flesh
in the lust of uncleanness, and despise
dominationem despiciunt, audaces, praefracti,
qui excellentias non verentur probro afficere;government. Presumptuous are they , selfwilled,
they are not afraid to speak evil of dignities.
11. Quum angeli, qui sunt robore et potentia
majores, non ferant adversus illas coram Domino
contumeliosum judicium.11. Whereas angels, which are greater in
power and might, bring not railing accusation
against them before the Lord.
 
9.The Lord knoweth.  What first offends the weak is, that when the faithful anxiously seek aid,
they are not immediately helped by God; but on the contrary he suffers them sometimes as it were
to pine away through daily weariness and languor; and secondly, when the wicked grow wanton
with impunity and God in the meantime is silent, as though he connived at their evil deeds. This
double offense Peter now removes; for he testifies that the Lord knows when it is expedient to
deliver the godly from temptation. By these words he reminds us that this office ought to be left to
him, and that therefore we ought to endure temptations, and not to faint, when at any time he defers
his vengeance against the ungodly.
This consolation is very necessary for us, for this thought is apt to creep in, “If the Lord would
have his own to be safe, why does he not gather them all into some corner of the earth, that they
may mutually stimulate one another to holiness? why does he mingle them with the wicked by
whom they may be defiled?” But when God claims to himself the office of helping, and protecting
his own, that they may not fail in the contest, we gather courage to fight more strenuously. The
meaning of the first clause is, that this law is prescribed by the Lord to all the godly, that they are
250John Calvin Comm on Catholic Epistles
to be proved by various temptations, but that they are to entertain good hope of success, because
they are never to be deprived of his aid and help.
And to reserve the unjust.  By this clause he shews that God so regulates his judgments as to
bear with the wicked for a time, but not to leave them unpunished. Thus he corrects too much haste,
by which we are wont to be carried headlong, especially when the atrocity of wickedness grievously
wounds us, for we then wish God to fulminate without delay; when he does not do so, he seems
no longer to be the judge of the world. Lest, then, this temporary impunity of wickedness should
disturb us, Peter reminds us that a day of judgment has been appointed by the Lord; and that,
therefore, the wicked shall by no means escape punishment, though it be not immediately inflicted.
There is an emphasis in the word reserve,  as though he had said, that they shall not escape the
hand of God, but be held bound as it were by hidden chains, that they may at a certain time be
drawn forth to judgment. The participle κολαζομένους , though in the present tense, is yet to be
thus explained, that they are reserved or kept to be punished, or, that they may be punished. For he
bids us to rely on the expectation of the last judgment, so that in hope and patience we may fight
till the end of life.
10.But chiefly them.  He comes here to particulars, accommodating a general doctrine to his
own purpose; for he had to do with men of desperate wickedness. He then shews that dreadful
vengeance necessarily awaited them. For since God will punish all the wicked, how can they escape
who abandon themselves like brute beasts to every kind of iniquity? To walk after the flesh,  is to
be given up to the flesh, like brute animals, who are not led by reason and judgment, but have the
natural desire of their flesh as their chief guide. By the lust of uncleanness  understand filthy and
unbridled gratifications, when men, having cast away every virtuous feeling, and shaken off shame,
are carried away into every uncleanness.
This is the first mark by which he brands them, that they are impure men, given up to wickedness.
Other marks follow, that they despised government, and feared not to calumniate and reproach men
whom God had favored with honorable stations in life. But these words refer to the same thing; for
after having said that they held government in contempt, he immediately points out the fountain
of this evil, that they were presumptuous,  or audacious , and self-willed,  or refractory ; 169 and lastly,
that he might more fully exhibit their pride, he says that they did not fear nor tremble when they
treated dignities with contempt. For it is a monstrous arrogance to regard as nothing the glory which
shines forth in dignities appointed by God.
But there is no doubt but that in these words he refers to the imperial and magisterial power;
for though there is no lawful station in life which is not worthy of respect, yet we know that the
magisterial office excels every other, because in governing mankind God himself is represented.
Then truly glorious is that power in which God himself appears.
We now perceive what the Apostle meant in this second clause, even that they of whom he
speaks were frantic men, lovers of tumults and confusion; for no one can introduce anarchy
(ἀναρχίαν ) into the world without introducing disorder ( ἀταξίαν .) Now, these with bold effrontery
vomited forth reproaches against magistrates, that they might take away every respect for public
rights; and this was openly to fight against God by their blasphemies. There are also many turbulent
169Rather, “self-pleasing,” αὐθάδεις , whose ruling principle was to please and gratify themselves, without regarding God's
will or the good of others whose god was self. In a second sense, the word designates those who are haughty, arrogant, supercilious,
refractory; and such is commonly the character of selfish men. — Ed.
251John Calvin Comm on Catholic Epistles
men of this sort at the present day, who proudly declare that the power of the sword is heathen and
unlawful, and furiously attempt to subvert all government. Such furies Satan excites, in order to
disturb and prevent the progress of the gospel. But the Lord hath dealt favorably with us; for he
hath not only warned us to beware of this deadly poison, but hath also by this ancient example
fortified us against this scandal. Hence the Papists act very dishonestly, when they accuse us, and
say that seditious men are made so by our doctrine. The same thing might indeed have been alleged
against the apostles formerly; and yet they were as far as possible from encouraging any such
wickedness.
11. Whereas angels.  He hence shews their rash arrogance, because they dared to assume more
liberty than even angels. But it seems strange that he says that angels do not bring a railing accusation
against magistrates; for why should they be adverse to that sacred order, the author of which they
know to be God? Why should they oppose rulers whom they know to be exercising the same
ministry with themselves? This reasoning has made some to think that the devils are meant; but
they do not thus by any means escape the difficulty. For how could Satan be so moderate as to
spare men, since he is the author of every blasphemy against God? And further, their opinion is
refuted by what Jude says. [ Jude 1:9 .]
But when we consider the circumstances of the time, what is said applies very suitably to holy
angels. For all the magistrates were then ungodly, and bloody enemies to the gospel. They must,
therefore, have been hateful to angels, the guardians of the Church. He, however, says, that men
deserving hatred and execration, were not condemned by them in order that they might shew respect
to a power divinely appointed. While such moderation, he says, is shewn by angels, these men
fearlessly give vent to impious and unbridled blasphemies.
2 Peter 2:12-16
12. Isti autem tanquam bruta animalia,
naturaliter genita in capturam et perniciem, in12. But these, as natural brute beasts, made
to be taken and destroyed, speak evil of the things
quibus nihil intelligunt maledicentes, in sua
corruptione peribuntthat they understand not; and shall utterly perish
in their own corruption;
13. Recipientes mercedem injustitiae, pro
voluptate ducentes in diem frui deliciis, labes et13. And shall receive the reward of
unrighteousness, as they that count it pleasure to
maculae, deliciantes in erroribus suis, conviventes
vobiscum;riot in the day time. Spots they are  and blemishes,
sporting themselves with their own deceivings
while they feast with you;
14. Oculos habentes plenos adulterae, et
inquietos ad peccandum, inescantes animas14. Having eyes full of adultery, and that
cannot cease from sin; beguiling unstable souls:
instabiles, cor habentes exercitatum cupiditatibus,
execrabiles: filii;an heart they have exercised with covetous
practices; cursed children:
15. Qui relicta via aberraverunt, sequuti viam
Balaam, filii Bozor, qui mercedem injustitiae
dilexit;15. Which have forsaken the right way, and
are gone astray, following the way of Balaam the
252John Calvin Comm on Catholic Epistles
son of Bosor, who loved the wages of
unrighteousness;
16. Sed redargutus fuit de sua iniquitate;
animal subjugale mutum, humana voce loquens,16. But was rebuked for his iniquity: the
dumb ass speaking with man’s voice forbade the
madness of the prophet. prohibuit prophetae dementiam. ( Numbers 23:16,
28.)
 
12.But these.  He proceeds with what he had begun to say respecting impious and wicked
corrupters. And, first, he condemns their loose manners and the obscene wickedness of their whole
life; and then he says that they were audacious and perverse, so that by their scurrilous garrulity
they insinuated themselves into the favor of many.
He especially compares them to those brute animals, which seem to have come to existence to
be ensnared, and to be driven to their own ruin by their own instinct; as though he had said, that
being induced by no allurements, they of themselves hasten to throw themselves into the snares of
Satan and of death. For what we render, naturally born,  Peter has literally, “natural born.” But there
is not much difference in the sense, whether one of the two has been by somebody else supplied,
or by putting down both he meant more fully to express his meaning. 170
What he adds, speaking evil of the things that they understand not,  refers to the pride and
presumption he mentioned in the preceding verse. He then says that all excellency was insolently
despised by them, because they were become wholly stupefied, so that they differed nothing from
beasts. But the word I have rendered for destruction, and afterwards in corruption, is the same,
φθορὰ ; but it is variously taken: but when he says that they would perish in their own corruption,
he shews that their corruptions would be ruinous or destructive.
13.Count it pleasure171 As though he had said, “They place their happiness in their present
enjoyments.” We know that men excel brute animals in this, that they extend their thoughts much
farther. It is, then, a base thing in man to be occupied only with present things. Here he reminds us
that our minds ought to be freed from the gratifications of the flesh, except we wish to be reduced
to the state of beasts.
The meaning of what follows is this, “These are filthy spots to you and your assembly; for while
they feast with you, they at the same time luxuriate in their errors, and shew by their eyes and
gestures their lascivious lusts and detestable incontinency.” Erasmus has rendered the words thus,
170 The words may be thus rendered, —
“But these, as natural unreasoning animals, born for capture and destruction, speaking evil of things which they understand not,
shall utterly perish through their own corruption.”
They are compared to animals which are by nature without reason, and such as live on prey, wild and rapacious, which
seem to have been made to be taken and destroyed; and they are often taken and destroyed while committing plunder. So these
men, their wickedness would be the means of ensnaring and destroying them. — Ed.
171 It is better to connect the first words of this verse, “receiving the reward of unrigrhteousness,” with the foregoing, and to
begin another period with this clause, and to render this verse and the following thus, —
“Counting (or, deeming) riot in the day-time a pleasure, they are spots and stains, rioting in their own delusions, feasting together
with (14) you; having eyes full of adultery and which cease not from sin, ensnaring unstable souls, having a heart inured to
covetous desires, being children of the curse.”
The various things said of them are intended to shew that they were “spots and stains,” disgraceful and defiling: they rioted
in carnal pleasure, and rioted in delusion, and associated with the faithful, feasting with them; they were libidinous, and led
unstable souls to follow their ways; they were covetous, and shewed that they were heirs to the curse of God. — Ed.
253John Calvin Comm on Catholic Epistles
“Feasting in their errors, they deride you.” But this is too forced. It may not unaptly be thus explained,
“Feasting with you, they insolently deride you by their errors.” I, however, have given the version
which seems the most probable, “luxuriating in their errors, feasting with you.” He calls the libidinous
such as had eyes full of adultery, and who were incessantly led to sin without restraint, as it appears
from what is afterwards said.
14. Beguiling, or baiting , unstable souls.  By the metaphor of baiting  he reminds the faithful to
beware of their hidden and deceitful arts; for he compares their impostures to hooks which may
catch the unwary to their destruction. By adding unstable souls  he shews the reason for caution,
that is, when we have not struck firm roots in faith and in the fear of the Lord: and he intimates at
the same time, that they have no excuse who suffer themselves to be baited or lured by such flatteries;
for this must have been ascribed to their levity. Let there be then a stability of faith, and we shall
be safe from the artifices of the ungodly.
An heart they have exercised with covetous practices,  or, with lusts . Erasmus renders the last
word, “rapines.” The word is of a doubtful meaning. I prefer “lusts.” As he had before condemned
incontinence in their eyes, so he now seems to refer to the vices latent in their hearts. It ought not,
however, to be confined to covetousness. By calling them cursed  or execrable children , he may be
understood to mean, that they were so either actively or passively, that is, that they brought a curse
with them wherever they went, or that they deserved a curse.
As he has hitherto referred to the injury they did by the example of a perverse and corrupt life,
so he again repeats, that they spread by their teaching the deadly poison of impiety, in order that
they might destroy the simple. He compares them to Balaam, the son of Bozor, who employed a
venal tongue to curse God’s people. And to shew that they were not worthy of a long refutation,
he says that Balaam was reproved by an ass, and that thus his madness was condemned. But by
this means also he restrains the faithful from associating with them. For it was a dreadful judgment
of God, that the angel made himself known to the ass before he did to the prophet, so that the ass,
perceiving God displeased, dared not to advance farther, but went back, when the prophet, under
the blind impulse of his own avarice, pushed forward against the evident prohibition of the Lord.
For what was afterwards answered to him, that he was to proceed, was an evidence of God's
indignation rather than a permission. In short, as the greatest indignity to him, the mouth of the ass
was opened, that he who had been unwilling to submit to God's authority might have that as his
teacher. And by this miracle the Lord designed to shew how monstrous a thing it was to change
the truth to a lie.
It may be here asked, by what right Balaam had the name of a prophet, when it appears that he
was addicted to many wicked superstitions. To this I reply, that the gift of prophecy was so special,
that though he did not worship the true God, and had not true religion, he might yet have been
endued with it. Besides, God has sometimes caused prophecy to exist in the midst of idolatry, in
order that men might have less excuse.
Now, if any one considers the chief things which Peter says, he will see that his warning is
equally suitable to the present age; for it is an evil which prevails everywhere, that men use scurrilous
raillery for the purpose of deriding God and the Savior; nay, they ridicule all religion under the
cloak of wit; and when addicted, like beasts, to their own lusts, they will mingle with the faithful;
they prattle something about the gospel, and yet they prostitute their tongue to the service of the
devil, that they may bring the whole world, as far as they can, to eternal perdition. They are in this
254John Calvin Comm on Catholic Epistles
respect worse than Balaam himself, because they gratuitously pour forth their maledictions, when
he, induced by reward, attempted to curse.
2 Peter 2:17-19
17. Ii sunt fontes sine aqua, nebulae quae
turbine aguntur; quibus caligo tenebrarum in
aeternum parata est.17. These are wells without water, clouds that
are carried with a tempest; to whom the mist of
darkness is reserved for ever.
18. Nam ubi plusqum fastuosa vanitatis verba
sonuerint, inescant per concupiscentias carnis,18. For when they speak great swelling words
of vanity, they allure through the lusts of the
lasciviis, eos qui verè aufugerant ab iis qui in
errore versantur.flesh, through much  wantonness, those that were
clean escaped from them who live in error.
19. Dum libertatem illis promittunt, quum
ipsi sint servi corruptionis: a quo enim quis
superatus est, huie in servitutem est addictus.19. While they promise them liberty, they
themselves are the servants of corruption: for of
whom a man is overcome, of the same is he
brought in bondage.
 
17.These are wells,  or fountains , without water.  He shews by these two metaphors, that they
had nothing within, though they made a great display. A fountain, by its appearance, draws men
to itself, because it promises them water to drink, and for other purposes; as soon as clouds appear,
they give hope of immediate rain to irrigate the earth. He then says that they were like fountains,
because they excelled in boasting, and displayed some acuteness in their thoughts and elegance in
their words; but that yet they were dry and barren within: hence the appearance of a fountain was
fallacious.
He says that they were  clouds carried  by the wind, either without rain, or which burst forth into
a calamitous storm. He thereby denotes that they brought nothing useful, and that often they were
very hurtful. He afterwards denounces on them the dreadful judgment of God, that fear might
restrain the faithful. By naming the mist  or the blackness of darkness,  he alludes to the clouds which
obscure the air; as though he had said, that for the momentary darkness which they now spread,
there is prepared for them a much thicker darkness which is to continue for ever.
18.For when they speak great swelling words of vanity.172 He means that they dazzled the eyes
of the simple by high-flown stuff of words, that they might not perceive their deceit, for it was not
easy to captivate their minds with such dotages, except they were first besotted by some artifice.
He then says that they used an inflated kind of words and speech, that they might fill the unwary
with admiration. And then this grandiloquence, which the ample lungs of the soul send forth, (as
172 The words are, —
“For uttering bombasts of vanity, they allure,” etc.
The word ὒπέρογκα , being a neuter plural, may be rendered as a noun; literally, “overswellings of vanity;” but when applied
to words, it means what is pompous, inflated, bombastic; but these bombasts were those of vanity, being empty, useless,
unprofitable; or as some render the words, they were the bombasts of falsehood, according to the meaning of the word as used
often in the Sept.; they spoke false things in a bombastic and inflated strain. — Ed.
255John Calvin Comm on Catholic Epistles
Persius says, 173 ) was very suitable to cover their shifts and trumperies. There was formerly a craft
of this kind in Valentinus, and in those like him, as we learn from the books of Irenaeus. They made
words unheard of before, by the empty sound of which, the unlearned being smitten, they were
ensnared by their reveries.
There are fanatics of a similar kind at this day, who call themselves by the plausible title of
Libertines or free-men. For they talk most confidently of the Spirit and of spiritual things, as though
they roared out from above the clouds, and fascinate many by their tricks and wiles, so that you
may say that the Apostle has correctly prophesied of them. For they treat all things jocosely and
scoffingly; and though they are great simpletons, yet as they indulge in all vices, they find favor
with their own people by a sort of drollery. The state of the case is this, that when the difference
between good and evil is removed, everything becomes lawful; and men, loosed from all subjection
to laws, obey their own lusts. This Epistle, therefore, is not a little suitable to our age.
They allure,  or bait, through the lusts of the flesh.  He strikingly compares to hooks the
allurements of the ungodly, when they make anything they please lawful; for as the lusts of men
are headstrong and craving, as soon as liberty is offered, they lay hold on it with great avidity; but
soon afterwards the strangling hook within is perceived. But we must consider the whole sentence
of the Apostle.
He says that they who had really escaped from the society of those in error were again deceived
by a new kind of error, even when the reins were let loose to them for the indulgence of every sort
of intemperance. He hereby reminds us how dangerous are the wiles of these men. For it was already
a dreadful thing that blindness and thick darkness possessed almost all mankind. It was, therefore,
in a manner a double prodigy, that men, freed from the common errors of the world, should, after
having received the light of God, be brought back to a beastly indifference. Let us be reminded of
what we ought especially to beware of, after having been once enlightened, that is, lest Satan entice
us under the pretense of liberty, so as to give ourselves up to lasciviousness to gratify the lusts of
the flesh. But they are safe from this danger who seriously attend to the study of holiness.
19.While they promise them liberty.  He shews their inconsistency, that they falsely promised
liberty, while they themselves served sin, and were in the worst bondage; for no one can give what
he has not. This reason, however, does not seem to be sufficiently valid, because it sometimes
happens that wicked men, and wholly unacquainted with Christ, preach usefully concerning the
benefits and blessings of Christ. But we must observe, that what is condemned here is vicious
doctrine, connected with impurity of life; for the Apostle's design was to obviate the deceptive
allurements by which they ensnared the foolish. The name of liberty is sweet, and they abused it
for this end, that the hearer, being loosed from the fear of the divine law, might abandon himself
unto unbridled licentiousness. But the liberty which Christ has procured for us, and which he offers
daily by the gospel, is altogether different, for he has exempted us from the yoke of the law as far
as it subjects us to a curse, that he might also deliver us from the dominion of sin, as far as it subjects
us to its own lusts. Hence, where lusts reign, and therefore where the flesh rules, there the liberty
of Christ has no place whatever. The Apostle then declares this to all the godly, that they might not
desire any other liberty but that which leads those, who are set free from sin, to a willing obedience
to righteousness.
173 Sat. 1:14.
256John Calvin Comm on Catholic Epistles
We hence learn that there have ever been depraved men who made a false pretense to liberty,
and that this has been an old cunning trick of Satan. We need not wonder that at this day the same
filth is stirred up by fanatical men.
The Papists turn and twist this passage against us, but they thereby betray their ridiculous
impudence. For in the first place, men of the filthiest life, in public-houses and brothels, belch out
this charge, that we are the servants of corruption, in the life of whom they cannot point out anything
reproachful. In the second place, since we teach nothing respecting Christian liberty but what is
derived from Christ and his Apostles, and at the same time require the mortification of the flesh,
and the proper exercises for subduing it, much more strictly than they do who slander us, they vomit
forth their curses, not so much against us as against the Son of God, whom we have as our certain
teacher and authority.
For of whom a man is overcome.  This sentence is derived from military law; but yet it is a
common saying among heathen writers, that there is no harder or a more miserable bondage than
when lusts rule and reign. What then ought to be done by us, on whom the Son of God has bestowed
his Spirit, not only that we may be freed from the dominion of sin, but that we may also become
the conquerors of the flesh and the world?
2 Peter 2:20-22
20. Nam si ii qui sufugerant ab inquinamentis
mundi per cognitionem Domini et Servatoris Jesu20. For if after they have escaped the
pollutions of the world through the knowledge
Christi, rursum iisdem impliciti superantur, facta
sunt illis postrema pejora prioribus.of the Lord and Saviour Jesus Christ, they are
again entangled therein, and overcome, the latter
end is worse with them than the beginning.
21. Melius enim ipsis esset non cognovisse
viam justitiae, qum ubi cognoverunt converti ab
eo, quod illis traditum fuit, sancto praecepto.21. For it had been better for them not to have
known the way of righteousness, than, after they
have known it, to turn from the holy
commandment delivered unto them.
22. Sed accidit illis quod vero proverbio
dicitur, Canis reversus ad proprium vomitum; et
sus lota, ad volutabrum coeni.22. But it is happened unto them according
to the true proverb, The dog is turned to his own
vomit again; and the sow that was washed to her
wallowing in the mire.
 
20.For if after.  He again shews how pernicious was the sect which led men consecrated to God
back again to their old filth and the corruptions of the world. And he exhibits the heinousness of
the evil by a comparison; for it was no common sin to depart from the holy doctrine of God. It
would have been better for them, he says, not to have known the way of righteousness; for though
there is no excuse for ignorance, yet the servant who knowingly and wilfully despises the commands
of his lord, deserves a twofold punishment. There was besides ingratitude, because they wilfully
extinguished the light of God, rejected the favor conferred on them, and having shaken off the yoke,
became perversely wanton against God; yea, as far as they could, they profaned and abrogated the
257John Calvin Comm on Catholic Epistles
inviolable covenant of God, which had been ratified by the blood of Christ. The more earnest then
ought we to be, to advance humbly and carefully in the course of our calling. We must now consider
each sentence.
By naming the pollutions of the world,  he shews that we roll in filth and are wholly polluted,
until we renounce the world. By the knowledge of Christ  he no doubt understands the gospel. He
testifies that the design of it is, to deliver us from the defilements of the world, and to lead us far
away from them. For the same reason he afterwards calls it the way of righteousness.  He then alone
makes a right progress in the gospel who faithfully learns Christ; and he truly knows Christ, who
has been taught by him to put off the old man and to put on the new man, as Paul reminds us in
Ephesians 4:22174
21. By saying that having forsaken the commandment delivered unto them,  they returned to
their own pollutions, he intimates first, how inexcusable they were; and secondly, he reminds us
that the doctrine of a holy and virtuous life, though common to all and indiscriminately belonging
to all, is yet peculiarly taught to those whom God favors with the light of his gospel. But he declares
that they who make themselves slaves again to the pollutions of the world fall away from the gospel.
The faithful also do indeed sin; but as they allow not dominion to sin, they do not fall away from
the grace of God, nor do they renounce the profession of sound doctrine which they have once
embraced. For they are not to be deemed conquered, while they strenuously resist the flesh and its
lusts.
22.But it has happened unto them.  As the example disturbs many, when men who had submitted
to the obedience of Christ, rush headlong into vices without fear or shame, the Apostle, in order to
remove the offense, says that this happens through their own fault, and that because they are pigs
and dogs. It hence follows that no part of the sin can be ascribed to the gospel.
For this purpose he quotes two ancient proverbs, the first of which is found as the saying of
Solomon in Proverbs 26:11 . But what Peter meant is briefly this, that the gospel is a medicine which
purges us by wholesome vomiting, but that there are many dogs who swallow again what they have
vomited to their own ruin; and that the gospel is also a laver which cleanses all our uncleanness,
but that there are many swine who, immediately after washing, roll themselves again in the mud.
At the same time the godly are reminded to take heed to themselves, except they wish to be deemed
dogs or swine.
