---
layout: calvin-chapter
book_id: 2peter
book_name: 彼得后书
chapter: 3
total_chapters: 3
header-img: psalm-bg-mountain.jpg
date: 2026-04-30 20:24
---

CHAPTER 3
2 Peter 3:1-4
1. Hane jam, dilecti, secundam vobis scribo
epistolam, in quibus excito per
commonefactionem vestram puram mentem;1. This second epistle, beloved, I now write
unto you; in both which I stir up your pure minds
by way of remembrance:
174 The end of this verse is not explained, but the words of the version, facta sunt illis postrema pejora prioribus , seem to
mean, that their last pollutions would become worse to them than their former pollutions; and this is the rendering of Macknight .
The sentence is commonly taken in the same sense as in Matthew 12:45 , but the words are somewhat different. — Ed.
258John Calvin Comm on Catholic Epistles
2. Ut memores sitis verborum quae predicta
sunt a sanctis prophetis, et praecepti nostri, qui
sumus apostoli Domini et Servatoris;2. That ye may be mindful of the words
which were spoken before by the holy prophets,
and of the commandment of us the apostles of
the Lord and Saviour:
3. Hoc primum scientes, quòd venient in
extremo dierum illusores, secundum suas ipsorum
concupiscentias ambulantes,3. Knowing this first, that there shall come
in the last days scoffers, walking after their own
lusts,
4. Ac dicentes, Ubi est promissio adventus
ejus? Ex quo enim patres dormierunt, omnia sic
permanent ab initio creationis.4. And saying, Where is the promise of his
coming? for since the fathers fell asleep, all
things continue as they were  from the beginning
of the creation.
 
1. Lest they should be wearied with the Second Epistle as though the first was sufficient, he
says that it was not written in vain, because they stood in need of being often stirred up. To make
this more evident, he shews that they could not be beyond danger, except they were well fortified,
because they would have to contend with desperate men, who would not only corrupt the purity of
the faith, by false opinions, but do what they could to subvert entirely the whole faith.
By saying, I stir up your pure mind,  he means the same as though he had said, “I wish to awaken
you to a sincerity of mind.” And the words ought to be thus explained, “I stir up your mind that it
may be pure and bright.” For the meaning is, that the minds of the godly become dim, and as it
were contract rust, when admonitions cease. But we also hence learn, that men even endued with
learning, become, in a manner, drowsy, except they are stirred up by constant warnings. 175
It now appears what is the use of admonitions, and how necessary they are; for the sloth of the
flesh smothers the truth once received, and renders it inefficient, except the goads of warnings come
to its aid. It is not then enough, that men should be taught to know what they ought to be, but there
is need of godly teachers, to do this second part, deeply to impress the truth on the memory of their
hearers. And as men are, by nature, for the most part, fond of novelty and thus inclined to be
fastidious, it is useful for us to bear in mind what Peter says, so that we may not only willingly
suffer ourselves to be admonished by others, but that every one may also exercise himself in calling
to mind continually the truth, so that our minds may become resplendent with the pure and clear
knowledge of it.
2.That ye may be mindful.  By these words he intimates that we have enough in the writings of
the prophets, and in the gospel, to stir us up, provided we be as diligent as it behoves us, in meditating
on them; and that our minds sometimes contract a rust, or become bedimmed through darkness, is
owing to our sloth. That God may then continually shine upon us, we must devote ourselves to that
study: let our faith at the same time acquiesce in witnesses so certain and credible. For when we
have the prophets and apostles agreeing with us, nay, as the ministers of our faith, and God as the
author, and angels as approvers, there is no reason that the ungodly, all united, should move us
175 The Apostle evidently admits that they had a sincere or a pure mind, that is, freed from the pollutions referred to in the last
chapter; but still they stood in need of being stirred up by admonitions: hence their minds were not, in a strict sense, perfect,
though sincere. — Ed.
259John Calvin Comm on Catholic Epistles
from our position. By the commandment of the apostles  he means the whole doctrine in which they
had instructed the faithful. 176
3.Knowing this first.  The participle knowing  may be applied to the Apostle, and in this way,
“I labor to stir you up for this reason, because I know what and how great is your impending danger
from scoffers.” I however prefer this explanation, that the participle is used in place of a verb, as
though he had said, “Know ye this especially.” For it was necessary that this should have been
foretold, because they might have been shaken, had impious men attacked them suddenly with
scoffs of this kind. He therefore wished them to know this, and to feel assured on the subject, that
they might be prepared to oppose such men.
But he calls the attention of the faithful again to the doctrine which he touched upon in the
second chapter. For by the last days  is commonly meant the kingdom of Christ, or the days of his
kingdom, according to what Paul says, “Upon whom the ends of the world are come.” ( 1 Corinthians
10:11 .) 177 The meaning is, that the more God offers himself by the gospel to the world, and the
more he invites men to his kingdom, the more audacious on the other hand will ungodly men vomit
forth the poison of their impiety.
He calls those scoffers,  according to what is usual in Scripture, who seek to appear witty by
shewing contempt to God, and by a blasphemous presumption. It is, moreover, the very extremity
of evil, when men allow themselves to treat the awful name of God with scoffs. Thus, the first
Psalm  speaks of the seat of scoffers. So David, in Psalms 119:51 , complains that he was derided
by the proud, because he attended to God’s law. So Isaiah, in the 28th chapter , having referred to
them, describes their supine security and insensibility. Let us therefore bear in mind, that there is
nothing to be feared more than a contest with scoffers. On this subject we said something while
explaining the third chapter of the Epistle to the Galatians. As, however, the Holy Scripture has
foretold that they would come, and has also given us a shield by which we may defend ourselves,
there is no excuse why we should not boldly resist them whatever devices they may employ.
4.Where is the promise. It was a dangerous scoff when they insinuated a doubt as to the last
resurrection; for when that is taken away, there is no gospel any longer, the power of Christ is
brought to nothing, the whole of religion is gone. Then Satan aims directly at the throat of the
Church, when he destroys faith in the coming of Christ. For why did Christ die and rise again,
except that he may some time gather to himself the redeemed from death, and give them eternal
life? All religion is wholly subverted, except faith in the resurrection remains firm and immovable.
Hence, on this point Satan assails us most fiercely.
But let us notice what the scoff was. They set the regular course of nature, such as it seems to
have been from the beginning, in opposition to the promise of God, as though these things were
contrary, or did not harmonize together. Though the faith of the fathers, they said, was the same,
yet no change has taken place since their death, and it is known that many ages have passed away.
176 The construction of the passage is as follows: — “In both which I, by admonition, arouse your sincere mind to remember
the words, aforetime spoken by the holy prophets, and the doctrine of us, the apostles of our Lord and Savior.”
The verb μνησθὢναι  is connected with “arouse;” and it is in this tense used actively as well as passively. See Matthew
26:75 , and Acts 10:31 . There is in the noun ἐντολὴ , a metonymy, the commandment for what was commanded to be taught, the
doctrine. It has this meaning, according to Schleusner , in John 12:50 , and in this Epistle, chapter 2:21 . — Ed
177 It is literally, “the last of the days,” according to the Hebrew form             , “the extremity of the days,” ( Isaiah 2:2 ;) but the
meaning is the same as “the last days,” as used in Hebrews 1:2 , and in other places, that is, the days of the gospel dispensation.
— Ed.
260John Calvin Comm on Catholic Epistles
Hence they concluded that what was said of the destruction of the world was a fable; because they
conjectured, that as it had lasted so long, it would be perpetual.
2 Peter 3:5-8
5. Nam hoe nesciunt volentes. quòd caeli jam
olim fuerint, et terra ex aqua, et per aquam
consistens, Dei sermone;5. For this they willingly are ignorant of, that
by the word of God the heavens were of old, and
the earth standing out of the water and in the
water:
6. Per quae mundus qui tunc erat, aqua
inundatus periit:6. Whereby the world that then was, being
overflowed with water, perished:
7. Qui autem nunc sunt coeli et terra, ejusdem
sermone repositi sunt, et servantur igni in diem
judicii et perditionis impiorum.7. But the heavens and the earth, which are
now, by the same word are kept in store, reserved
unto fire against the day of judgment and
perdition of ungodly men.
8. Porri, ne hoc unum nos lateat, dilecti, quòd
unus dies apud Dominum perinde est ut mille
anni, et mille anni ut dies unus.8. But, beloved, be not ignorant of this one
thing, that one day is with the Lord as a thousand
years, and a thousand years as one day.
 
5.For this they willingly are ignorant of.  By one argument only he confutes the scoff of the
ungodly, even by this, that the world once perished by a deluge of waters, when yet it consisted of
waters. ( Genesis 1:2 .) And as the history of this was well known, he says that they willingly,  or of
their own accord, erred. For they who infer the perpetuity of the world from its present state,
designedly close their eyes, so as not to see so clear a judgment of God. The world no doubt had
its origin from waters, for Moses calls the chaos from which the earth emerged, waters; and further,
it was sustained by waters; it yet pleased the Lord to use waters for the purpose of destroying it. It
hence appears that the power of nature is not sufficient to sustain and preserve the world, but that
on the contrary it contains the very element of its own ruin, whenever it may please God to destroy
it.
For it ought always to be borne in mind, that the world stands through no other power than that
of God's word, and that therefore inferior or secondary causes derive from him their power, and
produce different effects as they are directed. Thus through water the world stood, but water could
have done nothing of itself, but on the contrary obeyed God's word as an inferior agent or element.
As soon then as it pleased God to destroy the earth, the same water obeyed in becoming a ruinous
inundation. We now see how egregiously they err, who stop at naked elements, as though there
was perpetuity in them, and their nature were not changeable according to the bidding of God.
By these few words the petulance of those is abundantly refuted, who arm themselves with
physical reasons to fight against God. For the history of the deluge is an abundantly sufficient
witness that the whole order of nature is governed by the sole power of God. ( Genesis 7:17 .)
It seems, however, strange that he says that the world perished through the deluge, when he
had before mentioned the heaven and the earth. To this I answer, that the heaven was then also
261John Calvin Comm on Catholic Epistles
submerged, that is, the region of the air, which stood open between the two waters. For the division
or separation, mentioned by Moses, was then confounded. ( Genesis 1:6 ;) and the word heaven  is
often taken in this sense. if any wishes for more on this subject, let him read Augustine on the City
of God. Lib. 20. 178
7.But the heavens and the earth which are now.  He does not infer this as the consequence; for
his purpose was no other than to dissipate the craftiness of scoffers respecting the perpetual state
of nature, and we see many such at this day who being slightly embued with the rudiments of
philosophy, only hunt after profane speculations, in order that they may pass themselves off as
great philosophers.
But it now appears quite evident from what has been said, that there is nothing unreasonable
in the declaration made by the Lord, that the heaven and the earth shall hereafter be consumed by
fire, because the reason for the fire is the same as that for the water. For it was a common saying
even among the ancients, that from these two chief elements all things have proceeded. But as he
had to do with the ungodly, he speaks expressly of their destruction.
8.But be not ignorant of this one thing.  He now turns to speak to the godly; and he reminds
them that when the coming of Christ is the subject, they were to raise upwards their eyes, for by
so doing, they would not limit, by their unreasonable wishes, the time appointed by the Lord. For
waiting seems very long on this account, because we have our eyes fixed on the shortness of the
present life, and we also increase weariness by computing days, hours, and minutes. But when the
eternity of God's kingdom comes to our minds, many ages vanish away like so many moments.
This then is what the Apostle calls our attention to, so that we may know that the day of
resurrection does not depend on the present flow of time, but on the hidden purpose of God, as
though he had said, “Men wish to anticipate God for this reason, because they measure time
according to the judgment of their own flesh; and they are by nature inclined to impatience, so that
178 The two verses, the fifth and the sixth, have been differently explained. “The earth,” say some, “subsisting from water and
through water,” that is, emerging from water and made firm and solid by means of water; which is true, for through moisture
the earth adheres together and becomes a solid mass. Others render the last clause, “in water,” or in the midst of water, that is,
surrounded by water; and this is the most suitable meaning.
The δι ᾿ ὧν at the beginning of the sixth verse, refers, according to Beza, Whitby,  and others, to the heavens and the earth
in the preceding verse, the deluge being occasioned by “the windows of heaven being opened,” and “the fountains of the great
deep being broken up.” ( Genesis 7:11 .) “By which (or by the means of which) the world at that time, being overflowed with
water, was destroyed.”
The objection to this view is, as justly stated by Macknight , that the correspondence between this verse and the following
is thereby lost: the reservation of the world to be destroyed by fire is expressly ascribed, in verse seventh, to God’s word; and
to the same ought the destruction of the old world to be ascribed. This is doubtless the meaning required by the passage, but
“which” being in the plural, creates a difficulty, and there is no different reading. Macknight  solves the difficulty by saying that
the plural “which” or whom, refers to “word,” meaning Christ, and “God,” as in the first verse of this chapter, “in both which,”
a reference is made to what is implied in “the second Epistle,” that is, the first. He supposes that there is here the same anomalous
mode of speaking. But the conjecture which has been made is not improbable, that it is a typographical mistake, ὧν being put
for οὗ or for ὃν. Then the meaning would be evident; and the two parts would correspond the one with the other:
5. “For of this they are wilfully ignorant, that the heavens existed of old and the earth (which subsisted from water and in water,)
by
6. the word of God; by which the world at that time, being over-
7. flowed with water, was destroyed. But the present heavens and the earth are by His word reserved, being kept for fire to the
day of judgment and of the perdition of ungodly men.”
By “word” here is meant command, or power, or the fiat by which the world was created; and by the same it was destroyed,
and by the same it will be finally destroyed. Instead of αὐτῶ  “the same” Griesbach  has introduced into his text αὐτοῦ , “His.”
— Ed
262John Calvin Comm on Catholic Epistles
celerity is even delay to them: do ye then ascend in your minds to heaven, and thus time will be to
you neither long nor short.”
2 Peter 1:9-13
9. Non tardat Dominus in promissione, sicuti
quidam tarditatem slackness; existimant; sed9. The Lord is not slack concerning his
promise, as some men count slackness; but is
tolerantem se praebet erga nos, nolens ullos longsuffering to us-ward, not willing that any
perire, sed omnes ad poenitentiam recipere ( aut,
colligi, vel, aggregari. )should perish, but that all should come to
repentance.
10. Veniet autem dies Domini tanquam fur
in nocte, in qua coeli in modum procellae10. But the day of the Lord will come as a
thief in the night; in the which the heavens shall
transibunt, elementa autem ardore solventur; et
terra, quaeque in ea sunt opera ardebunt.pass away with a great noise, and the elements
shall melt with fervent heat, the earth also and
the works that are therein shall be burnt up.
11. Quum Haec igitur omnia solvantur, quales
oportet nos esse in sanctis conversationibus et
pietatibus;11.Seeing  then that all these things shall be
dissolved, what manner of persons  ought ye to
be in all holy conversation and godliness,
12. Expectantes properando adventum diei
Dei, propter quem coeli solventur, et elementa
ardore consumentur?12. Looking for and hasting unto the coming
of the day of God, wherein the heavens being on
fire shall be dissolved, and the elements shall
melt with fervent heat?
13. Novos autem coelos et terram novam
juxta promissum ejus expectamus, ín quibus
habitat justitia.13. Nevertheless we, according to his
promise, look for new heavens and a new earth,
wherein dwelleth righteousness.
 
9.But the Lord is not slack,  or, delays not . He checks extreme and unreasonable haste by another
reason, that is, that the Lord defers his coming that he might invite all mankind to repentance. For
our minds are always prurient, and a doubt often creeps in, why he does not come sooner. But when
we hear that the Lord, in delaying, shews a concern for our salvation, and that he defers the time
because he has a care for us, there is no reason why we should any longer complain of tardiness.
He is tardy who allows an occasion to pass by through slothfulness: there is nothing like this in
God, who in the best manner regulates time to promote our salvation. And as to the duration of the
whole world, we must think exactly the same as of the life of every individual; for God by prolonging
time to each, sustains him that he may repent. In the like manner he does not hasten the end of the
world, in order to give to all time to repent.
This is a very necessary admonition, so that we may learn to employ time aright, as we shall
otherwise suffer a just punishment for our idleness.
Not willing that any should perish.  So wonderful is his love towards mankind, that he would
have them all to be saved, and is of his own self prepared to bestow salvation on the lost. But the
order is to be noticed, that God is ready to receive all to repentance, so that none may perish; for
263John Calvin Comm on Catholic Epistles
in these words the way and manner of obtaining salvation is pointed out. Every one of us, therefore,
who is desirous of salvation, must learn to enter in by this way.
But it may be asked, If God wishes none to perish, why is it that so many do perish? To this
my answer is, that no mention is here made of the hidden purpose of God, according to which the
reprobate are doomed to their own ruin, but only of his will as made known to us in the gospel. For
God there stretches forth his hand without a difference to all, but lays hold only of those, to lead
them to himself, whom he has chosen before the foundation of the world. 179
But as the verb χωρὢσαι  is often taken passively by the Greeks, no less suitable to this passage
is the verb which I have put in the margin, that God would have all, who had been before wandering
and scattered, to be gathered or come together to repentance.
10.But the day of the Lord will come.  This has been added, that the faithful might be always
watching, and not promise to-morrow to themselves. For we all labor under two very different evils
— too much haste, and slothfulness. We are seized with impatience for the day of Christ already
expected; at the same time we securely regard it as afar off. As, then, the Apostle has before reproved
an unreasonable ardor, so he now shakes off our sleepiness, so that we may attentively expect Christ
at all times, lest we should become idle and negligent, as it is usually the case. For whence is it that
flesh indulges itself except that there is no thought of the near coming of Christ?
What afterwards follows, respecting the burning of heaven and earth, requires no long
explanation, if indeed we duly consider what is intended. For it was not his purpose to speak
refinedly of fire and storm, and other things, but only that he might introduce an exhortation, which
he immediately adds, even that we ought to strive after newness of life. For he thus reasons, that
as heaven and earth are to be purged by fire, that they may correspond with the kingdom of Christ,
hence the renovation of men is much more necessary. Mischievous, then, are those interpreters
who consume much labor on refined speculations, since the Apostle applies his doctrine to godly
exhortations.
Heaven and earth, he says, shall pass away for our sakes; is it meet, then, for us to be engrossed
with the things of earth, and not, on the contrary, to attend to a holy and godly life? The corruptions
of heaven and earth will be purged by fire, while yet as the creatures of God they are pure; what
then ought to be done by us who are full of so many pollutions? As to the word godlinesses
(pietatibus ,) the plural number is used for the singular, except you take it as meaning the duties of
godliness. 180 Of the elements of the world I shall only say this one thing, that they are to be
consumed, only that they may be renovated, their substance still remaining the same, as it may be
easily gathered from Romans 8:21 , and from other passages. 181
12Looking for and hasting unto,  or, waiting for by hastening ; so I render the words, though
they are two participles; for what we had before separately he gathers now into one sentence, that
is, that we ought hastily to wait. Now this contrarious hope possesses no small elegance, like the
proverb, “Hasten slowly,” ( festina lente .) When he says, “Waiting for,” he refers to the endurance
179 A similar view was taken by Estius, Piscator , and Beza.  — Ed.
180 The previous word is also in the plural number, “in holy conversations.” What seems to be meant is, that every part of the
conduct should be holy, and that every part of godliness should be attended to: “In every part of a holy life, and every act of
godliness;” that is, we are not to be holy in part or pious in part, but attend to every branch of duty towards man, and every
branch of duty towards God. — Ed.
181 All that is said here is, that there will be new heavens and a new earth, and not that the present heavens and the present
earth will be renovated. See Revelation 20:11; 21:1 . — Ed.
264John Calvin Comm on Catholic Epistles
of hope; and he sets hastening in opposition to topor; and both are very apposite. For as quietness
and waiting are the peculiarities of hope, so we must always take heed lest the security of the flesh
should creep in; we ought, therefore, strenuously to labor in good works, and run quickly in the
race of our calling. 182 What he before called the day of Christ (as it is everywhere called in Scripture)
he now calls the day of God, and that rightly, for Christ will then restore the kingdom to the Father,
that God may be all in all.
2 Peter 3:14-18
14. Quare, dilecti, quum Haec expectetis,
studete incontaminati et irreprehensibiles ab eo
inyeniri in pace:14. Wherefore, beloved, seeing that ye look
for such things, be diligent that ye may be found
of him in peace, without spot, and blameless.
15. Et Domini nostri tolerantiam salutem
existimate, quemadmodum et dilectus frater15. And account that the longsuffering of our
Lord is salvation; even as our beloved brother
noster Paulus, secundum datam sibi sapientiam
scripsit vobis;Paul also according to the wisdom given unto
him hath written unto you;
16. Sicuti in omnibus Epistolis, loquens de
iis in quibus sunt quaedam difficilia intellectu,16. As also in all his epistles, speaking in
them of these things; in which are some things
quae indocti et instabiles invertunt (ut et caeteras
Scripturas) ad suam perniciem.hard to be understood, which they that are
unlearned and unstable wrest, as they do  also the
other scriptures, unto their own destruction.
17. Vos igitur, dilecti, praemoniti cavete, ut
ne simul nefariorum errore abacti, excidatis à
vestra firmitate.17. Ye therefore, beloved, seeing ye know
these things  before, beware lest ye also, being
led away with the error of the wicked, fall from
your own stedfastness.
18. Crescite autem in gratia et notitia Domini
nostri et Servatoris Jesu Christi; ipsi gloria et
nunc et in diem seternitatis18. But grow in grace, and in the knowledge
of our Lord and Saviour Jesus Christ. To him be
glory both now and for ever. Amen.
 
14. Wherefore.  He justly reasons from hope to its effect, or the practice of a godly life; for hope
is living and efficacious; therefore it cannot be but that it will attract us to itself. He, then, who
waits for new heavens, must begin with renewal as to himself, and diligently aspire after it; but
they who cleave to their own filth, think nothing, it is certain, of God's kingdom, and have no taste
for anything but for this corrupt world.
But we must notice that he says, that we ought to be found blameless by Christ; for by these
words he intimates, that while the world engages and engrosses the minds of others, we must cast
182The first meaning of σπεύδω  is to hasten, and it is often used, when connected with another verb, adverbially as proposed
by Calvin; but when followed as here by an accusative case, it has often the secondary meaning of earnestly desiring a thing. It
is so taken here by Schleusner , Parkhurst , and Macknight ; “Expecting and earnestly desiring the coming of the day of God.” —
Ed
265John Calvin Comm on Catholic Epistles
our eyes on the Lord, and he shews at the same time what is real integrity, even that which is
approved by his judgment, and not that which gains the Praise of men. 183
The word peace  seems to be taken for a quiet state of conscience, founded on hope and patient
waiting. 184 For as so few turn their attention to the judgment of Christ, hence it is, that while they
are carried headlong by their importunate lusts, they are at the same time in a state of disquietude.
This peace, then, is the quietness of a peaceable soul, which acquiesces in the word of God.
It may be asked, how any one can be found blameless by Christ, when we all labor under so
many deficiencies. But Peter here only points out the mark at which the faithful ought all to aim,
though they cannot reach it, until having put off their flesh they become wholly united to Christ.
15.The long-suffering of our Lord.  He takes it as granted that Christ defers the day of his
coming, because he has a regard for our salvation. He hence animates the faithful, because in a
longer delay they have an evidence as to their own salvation. Thus, what usually disheartens others
through weariness, he wisely turns to a contrary purpose.
Even as our beloved brother Paul.  We may easily gather from the Epistle to the Galatians, as
well as from other places, that unprincipled men, who went about everywhere to disturb the churches,
in order to discredit Paul, made use of this pretense, that he did not well agree with the other
Apostles. It is then probable that Peter referred to Paul in order to shew their consent; for it was
very necessary to take away the occasion for such a calumny. And yet, when I examine all things
more narrowly, it seems to me more probable that this Epistle was composed by another according
to what Peter communicated, than that it was written by himself, for Peter himself would have
never spoken thus. But it is enough for me that we have a witness of his doctrine and of his goodwill,
who brought forward nothing contrary to what he would have himself said.
16.In which are some things.  The relative which  does not refer to epistles,  for it is in the neuter
gender. 185 The meaning is, that in the things which he wrote there was sometimes an obscurity,
183He says, “Expecting these things, be diligent,” etc.; σπουδάσατε , hasten, make speed, diligently strive, earnestly labor,
carefully endeavor: “Therefore, beloved, since ye expect these things, diligently strive to be found by him in peace, unspotted
and unblamable;” that is, having no stain, and not chargeable with crime. — Ed
184 Some say, “peace” with God; but the view of Calvin  is more suitable here. — Ed.
185 It is in the feminine gender in some MSS. The authority as to the copies and versions is nearly equal. The difference is not
much as to the sense, only “in which epistles,” reads better. So thought Beza, Mill , and others.
It has been a question as to the particular epistle referred to by Peter; for that he alludes to some particular epistle is evident
from the manner in which he writes. The difficulty has arisen from connecting the reference made to Paul, only with the former
part of the 15th verse, while that part ought to be viewed only as an addition to the former verse; and the former verse stands
connected with the new heavens and the new earth. So that the subjects in hand are the day of judgment, the future state, and
the necessity of being prepared for it; and that these are the things referred to is evident from this, that he says, that Paul speaks
of them in all his epistles, which is not true, as to what is said at the beginning of the 15th verse. The passage then ought to be
thus rendered: —
14. Therefore, beloved, since ye expect these things,
diligently strive to be found by him in peace,
unspotted and unblamable;
15. and deem the long-suffering of our Lord to be for  salvation:
even as Paul, our beloved brother, has, according to the wisdom given
16. to him, written to you; as also in all his epistles,
when speaking in them of these things;
in which (epistles) there are some things difficult to be understood,”
etc.
Now the special epistle referred to was most probably the epistle to the Hebrews, one particular design of which was to
direct the attention of the Jews to the country promised to their fathers. Some, indeed, hold that that epistle was written to the
266John Calvin Comm on Catholic Epistles
