---
layout: calvin-chapter
book_id: 1john
book_name: 约翰一书
chapter: 1
total_chapters: 5
header-img: psalm-bg-mountain.jpg
date: 2026-04-30 20:24
---

CHAPTER 1
1 John 1:1-2
1. Quod erat ab initio, quod audivimus, quod
vidimus oculis nostris, quod intuiti sumus, quod
manus nostrae contrectaverunt, de Sermone vitae;1. That which was from the beginning, which
we have heard, which we have seen with our
eyes, which we have looked upon, and our hands
have handled, of the Word of life;
2. Et vita manifesta est, et vidimus et testamur
et annuntiamus vobis vitam aeternam, quae erat
apud Patrem, et manifesta est nobis.2. (For the life was manifested, and we have
seen it, and bear witness, and shew unto you that
eternal life, which was with the Father, and was
manifested unto us;)
 
He shows, first, that life has been exhibited to us in Christ; which, as it is an incomparable good,
ought to rouse and inflame all our powers with a marvelous desire for it, and with the love of it. It
is said, indeed, in a few and plain words, that life is manifested; but if we consider how miserable
and horrible a condition death is, and also what is the kingdom and the glory of immortality, we
shall perceive that there is something here more magnificent than what can be expressed in any
words.
Then the Apostle’s object, in setting before us the vast good, yea, the chief and only true
happiness which God has conferred on us, in his own Son, is to raise our thoughts above; but as
the greatness of the subject requires that the truth should be certain, and fully proved, this is what
is here much dwelt upon. For these words , What we have seen, what we have heard, what we have
looked on,  serve to strengthen our faith in the gospel. Nor does he, indeed, without reason, make
so many asseverations; for since our salvation depends on the gospel, its certainty is in the highest
degree necessary; and how difficult it is for us to believe, every one of us knows too well by his
own experience. To believe is not lightly to form an opinion, or to assent only to what is said, but
a firm, undoubting conviction, so that we may dare to subscribe to the truth as fully proved. It is
for this reason that the Apostle heaps together so many things in confirmation of the gospel.
96John Calvin Comm on Catholic Epistles
1That which was from the beginning  As the passage is abrupt and involved, that the sense may
be made clearer, the words may be thus arranged; “We announce to you the word of life, which
was from the beginning and really testified to us in all manner of ways, that life has been manifested
in him;” or, if you prefer, the meaning may be thus given, “What we announce to you respecting
the word of life, has been from the beginning, and has been openly shewed to us, that life was
manifested in him.” But the words, That which was from the beginning,  refer doubtless to the
divinity of Christ, for God manifested in the flesh was not from the beginning; but he who always
was life and the eternal Word of God, appeared in the fullness of time as man. Again, what follows
as to the looking on and the handling of the hands, refers to his human nature. But as the two natures
constitute but one person, and Christ is one, because he came forth from the Father that he might
put on our flesh, the Apostle rightly declares that he is the same, and had been invisible, and
afterwards became visible. 59
Hereby the senseless cavil of Servetus is disproved, that the nature and essence of Deity became
one with the flesh, and that thus the Word was transformed into flesh, because the life-giving Word
was seen in the flesh.
Let us then bear in mind, that this doctrine of the Gospel is here declared, that he who in the
flesh really proved himself to be the Son of God, and was acknowledged to be the Son of God, was
always God’s invisible Word, for he does not refer here to the beginning of the world, but ascends
much higher.
Which we have heard, which we have seen.  It was not the hearing of a report, to which little
credit is usually given, but John means, that he had faithfully learnt from his Master those things
which he taught, so that he alleged nothing thoughtlessly and rashly. And, doubtless, no one is a
fit teacher in the Church, who has not been the disciple of the Son of God, and rightly instructed
in his school, since his authority alone ought to prevail.
When he says, we have seen with our eyes , it is no redundancy, but a fuller expression for the
sake of amplifying; nay, he was not satisfied with seeing only, but added, which we have looked
upon, and our hands have handled  By these words he shews that he taught nothing but what had
been really made known to him.
It may seem, however, that the evidence of the senses little availed on the present subject, for
the power of Christ could not be perceived by the eyes nor felt by the hands. To this I answer, that
the same thing is said here as in the first chapter of  the Gospel of John, “We have seen his glory,
the glory as of the only begotten of the Father;” for he was not known as the Son of God by the
external form of his body, but because he gave illustrious proofs of his Divine power, so that in
him shone forth the majesty of the Father, as in a living and distinct image. As the words are in the
plural number, and the subject equally applies to all the apostles, I am disposed to include them,
especially as the authority of testimony is what is treated of.
But no less frivolous (as I have before said) than impudent is the wickedness of Servetus, who
urges these words to prove that the Word of God became visible and capable of being handled; he
either impiously destroys or mingles together the twofold nature of Christ. It is, therefore, a pure
59 It is more consistent with the passage to take “from the beginning” here as from the beginning of the Gospel, from the
beginning of the ministry of our Savior, because what had been from the beginning was what the apostles had heard and seen.
That another view has been taken of these words has been owing to an over-anxiety on the part of many, especially of the Fathers,
to establish the divinity of our Savior; but this is what is sufficiently evident from the second verse. See ch. 2:7, 24 . — Ed.
97John Calvin Comm on Catholic Epistles
figment. Thus deifying the humanity of Christ, he wholly takes away the reality of his human nature,
at the same time denying that Christ is for any other reason called the Son of God, except that he
was conceived of his mother by the power of the Holy Spirit, and taking away his own subsistence
in God. It hence follows that he was neither God nor man, though he seems to form a confused
mass from both. But as the meaning of the Apostle is evident to us, let us pass by that unprincipled
man.
Of the Word of life  The genitive here is used for an adjective, vivifying, or life-giving; for in
him, as it is said in the first chapter of John’s Gospel, was life. At the same time, this distinction
belongs to the Son of God on two accounts, because he has infused life into all creatures, and
because he now restores life to us, which had perished, having been extinguished by the sin of
Adam. Moreover, the term Word may be explained in two ways, either of Christ, or of the doctrine
of the Gospel, for even by this is salvation brought to us. But as its substance is Christ, and as it
contains no other thing than that he, who had been always with the Father, was at length manifested
to men, the first view appears to me the more simple and genuine. Moreover, it appears more fully
from the Gospel that the wisdom which dwells in God is called the Word.
2For (or, and) the life was manifested  The copulative is explanatory, as though he had said,
“We testify of the vivifying Word, as life has been manifested.” The sense may at the same time
be twofold, that Christ, who is life and the fountain of life, has been manifested, or, that life has
been openly offered to us in Christ. The latter, indeed, necessarily follows from the former. Yet as
to the meaning, the two things differ, as cause and effect. When he repeats, We shew , or announce
eternal life , he speaks, I have no doubt, of the effect, even that he announces that life is obtained
for us in Christ.
We hence learn, that when Christ is preached to us, the kingdom of heaven is opened to us, so
that being raised from death we may live the life of God.
Which was with the Father.  This is true, not only from the time when the world was formed,
but also from eternity, for he was always God, the fountain of life; and the power and the faculty
of vivifying was possessed by his eternal wisdom: but he did not actually exercise it before the
creation of the world, and from the time when God began to exhibit the Word, that power which
before was hid, diffused itself over all created things. Some manifestation had already been made;
the Apostle had another thing in view, that is, that life was then at length manifested in Christ, when
he in our flesh completed the work of redemption. For though the fathers were even under the law
associates and partakers of the same life, yet we know that they were shut up under the hope that
was to be revealed. It was necessary for them to seek life from the death and resurrection of Christ;
but the event was not only far remote from their eyes, but also hid from their minds. They depended,
then, on the hope of revelation, which at length in due time followed. They could not, indeed, have
obtained life, except it was in some way manifested to them; but the difference between us and
them is, that we hold him already revealed as it were in our hands, whom they sought obscurely
promised to them in types.
But the object of the Apostle is, to remove the idea of novelty, which might have lessened the
dignity of the Gospel; he therefore says, that life had not now at length began to be, though it had
but lately appeared, for it was always with the Father.
98John Calvin Comm on Catholic Epistles
1 John 1:3-7
3. Quod vidimus et audivimus, annuntiamus
vobis, ut et vos societatem habeatis nobiscum, et3. That which we have seen and heard declare
we unto you, that ye also may have fellowship
societas nostra sit cum Patre et cure filio ejus Jesu
Christo.with us: and truly our fellowship is with the
Father, and with his Son Jesus Christ.
4. Et hæc scribimus vobis, ut gaudium
vestrum sit completum.4. And these things write we unto you, that
your joy may be full.
5. Et haec est promissio quam annuntiamus,
quod Deus lux est, et tenebrae in eo non sunt
ullae.5. This then is the message which we have
heard of him, and declare unto you, that God is
light, and in him is no darkness at all.
6. Si dixerimus quod societatem habemus
cum eo, et in tenebris ambulamus, mentimur, et
veritatem non facimus.6. If we say that we have fellowship with him,
and walk in darkness, we lie, and do not the truth:
7. Si autem in luce ambulamus, sicut ipse in
luce est, societatem habemus inter nos mutuam,7. But if we walk in the light, as he is in the
light, we have fellowship one with another, and
et sanguis Jesu Christi filii ejus emundat nos ab
omni peccato.the blood of Jesus Christ his Son cleanseth us
from all sin.
 
3 That which we have seen.  He now repeats the third time the words, seen and heard , that
nothing might be wanting as to the real certainty of his doctrine. And it ought to be carefully noticed,
that the heralds of the Gospel chosen by Christ were those who were fit and faithful witnesses of
all those things which they were to declare. He also testifies of the feeling of their heart, for he says
that he was moved by no other reason to write except to invite those to whom he was writing to
the participation of an inestimable good. It hence appears how much care he had for their salvation;
which served not a little to induce them to believe; for extremely ungrateful we must be, if we
refuse to hear him who wishes to communicate to us a part of that happiness which he has obtained.
He also sets forth the fruit received from the Gospel, even that we are united thereby to God,
and to his Son Christ in whom is found the chief good. It was necessary for him to add this second
clause, not only that he might represent the doctrine of the Gospel as precious and lovely, but that
he might also show that he wished them to be his associates for no other end but to lead them to
God, so that they might be all one in him. For the ungodly have also a mutual union between
themselves, but it is without God, nay, in order to alienate themselves more and more from God,
which is the extreme of all evils. It is, indeed, as it has been stated, our only true happiness, to be
received into God’s favor, so that we may be really united to him in Christ; of which John speaks
in the seventeenth chapter of his gospel .
In short, John declares, that as the apostles were adopted by Christ as brethren, that being
gathered into one body, they might together be united to God, so he does the same with other
colleagues; though many, they are yet made partakers of this holy and blessed union.
4That your joy may be full  By full joy, he expresses more clearly the complete and perfect
happiness which we obtain through the Gospel; at the same time he reminds the faithful where they
ought to fix all their affections. True is that saying,
99John Calvin Comm on Catholic Epistles
“Where your treasure is, there will be your heart also.”
(Matthew 6:21 .)
Whosoever, then, really perceives what fellowship with God is, will be satisfied with it alone,
and will no more burn with desires for other things.
“The Lord is my cup,” says David, “and my heritage; the lines have fallen for me on an excellent
lot.” ( Psalm 16:5, 6 .)
In the same manner does Paul declare that all things were deemed by him as dung, in comparison
with Christ alone. ( Philippians 3:8 .) He, therefore, has at length made a proficiency in the Gospel,
who esteems himself happy in having communion with God, and acquiesces in that alone; and thus
he prefers it to the whole world, so that he is ready for its sake to relinquish all other things.
5 This then is the message , or promise . I do not disapprove of the rendering of the old interpreter,
“This is the annunciation,” or message ; for though ἐπαγγελία  means for the most part a promise,
yet, as John speaks here generally of the testimony before mentioned, the context seems to require
the other meaning, except you were to give this explanation, “The promise which we bring to you,
includes this, or has this condition annexed to it.” Thus, the meaning of the Apostle would become
evident to us. 60 For his object here was not to include the whole doctrine of the Gospel, but to shew
that if we desire to enjoy Christ and his blessings, it is required of us to be conformed to God in
righteousness and holiness. Paul says the same thing in the second chapter of the Epistle to Titus ,
“Appeared has the saving grace of God to all, that denying ungodliness and worldly lusts, we may
live soberly and righteously and holily in this world;” except that here he says metaphorically, that
we are to walk in the light, because God is light.
But he calls God light, and says that he is in the light ; such expressions are not to be too strictly
taken. Why Satan is called the prince of darkness is sufficiently evident. When, therefore, God on
the other hand is called the Father of light, and also light, we first understand that there is nothing
in him but what is bright, pure, and unalloyed; and, secondly, that he makes all things so manifest
by his brightness, that he suffers nothing vicious or perverted, no spots or filth, no hypocrisy or
fraud, to lie hid. Then the sum of what is said is, that since there is no union between light and
darkness, there is a separation between us and God as long as we walk in darkness; and that the
fellowship which he mentions, cannot exist except we also become pure and holy.
In him is no darkness at all.  This mode of speaking is commonly used by John, to amplify what
he has affirmed by a contrary negation. Then, the meaning is, that God is such a light, that no
darkness belongs to him. It hence follows, that he hates an evil conscience, pollution, and wickedness,
and everything that pertains to darkness.
6If we say  It is, indeed, an argument from what is inconsistent, when he concludes that they
are alienated from God, who walk in darkness. This doctrine, however, depends on a higher principle,
that God sanctifies all who are his. For it is not a naked precept that he gives, which requires that
our life should be holy; but he rather shews that the grace of Christ serves for this end to dissipate
darkness, and to kindle in us the light of God; as though he had said, “What God communicates to
us is not a vain fiction; for it is necessary that the power and effect of this fellowship should shine
forth in our life; otherwise the possession of the gospel is fallacious.” What he adds, and do not
60Griesbach has substituted ἀγγελία  for the word here used, as being most approved; but the other, ἐπαγγελία , has also a
similar meaning, announcement, or message, or command, though in the New Testament it is mostly taken in the sense of a
promise. — Ed
100John Calvin Comm on Catholic Epistles
the truth , is the same as if he had said, “We do not act truthfully. We do not regard what is true and
right.” And this mode of speaking, as I have before observed, is frequently used by him.
7But if we walk in the light.  He now says, that the proof of our union with God is certain, if
we are conformable to him; not that purity of life conciliates us to God, as the prior cause; but the
Apostle means, that our union with God is made evident by the effect, that is, when his purity shines
forth in us. And, doubtless, such is the fact; wherever God comes, all things are so imbued with
his holiness, that he washes away all filth; for without him we have nothing but filth and darkness.
It is hence evident, that no one leads a holy life, except he is united to God.
In saying, We have fellowship one with another,  he does not speak simply of men; but he sets
God on one side, and us on the other.
It may, however, be asked, “Who among men can so exhibit the light of God in his life, as that
this likeness which John requires should exist; for it would be thus necessary, that he should be
wholly pure and free from darkness.” To this I answer, that expressions of this kind are
accommodated to the capacities of men; he is therefore said to be like God, who aspires to his
likeness, however distant from it he may as yet be. The example ought not to be otherwise applied
than according to this passage. He walks in darkness who is not ruled by the fear of God, and who
does not, with a pure conscience, devote himself wholly to God, and seek to promote his glory.
Then, on the other hand, he who in sincerity of heart spends his life, yea, every part of it, in the
fear and service of God, and faithfully worships him, walks in the light, for he keeps the right way,
though he may in many things offend and sigh under the burden of the flesh. Then, integrity of
conscience is alone that which distinguishes light from darkness.
And the blood of Jesus Christ  After having taught what is the bond of our union with God, he
now shews what fruit flows from it, even that our sins are freely remitted. And this is the blessedness
which David describes in the thirty-second Psalm , in order that we may know that we are most
miserable until, being renewed by God’s Spirit, we serve him with a sincere heart. For who can be
imagined more miserable than that man whom God hates and abominates, and over whose head is
suspended both the wrath of God and eternal death?
This passage is remarkable; and from it we first learn, that the expiation of Christ, effected by
his death, does then properly belong to us, when we, in uprightness of heart, do what is right and
just for Christ is no redeemer except to those who turn from iniquity, and lead a new life. If, then,
we desire to have God propitious to us, so as to forgive our sins, we ought not to forgive ourselves.
In short, remission of sins cannot be separated from repentance, nor can the peace of God be in
those hearts, where the fear God does not prevail.
Secondly, this passage shews that the gratuitous pardon of sins is given us not only once, but
that it is a benefit perpetually residing in the Church, and daily offered to the faithful. For the
Apostle here addresses the faithful; as doubtless no man has ever been, nor ever will be, who can
otherwise please God, since all are guilty before him; for however strong a desire there may be in
us of acting rightly, we always go haltingly to God. Yet what is half done obtains no approval with
God. In the meantime, by new sins we continually separate ourselves, as far as we can, from the
grace of God. Thus it is, that all the saints have need of the daily forgiveness of sins; for this alone
keeps us in the family of God.
By saying, from all sin,  he intimates that we are, on many accounts, guilty before God; so that
doubtless there is no one who has not many vices. But he shews that no sins prevent the godly, and
those who fear God, from obtaining his favor. He also points out the manner of obtaining pardon,
101John Calvin Comm on Catholic Epistles
and the cause of our cleansing, even because Christ expiated our sins by his blood; but he affirms
that all the godly are undoubtedly partakers of this cleansing.
The whole of his doctrine has been wickedly perverted by the sophists; for they imagine that
pardon of sins is given us, as it were, in baptism. They maintain that there only the blood of Christ
avails; and they teach, that after baptism, God is not otherwise reconciled than by satisfactions.
They, indeed, leave some part to the blood of Christ; but when they assign merit to works, even in
the least degree, they wholly subvert what John teaches here, as to the way of expiating sins, and
of being reconciled to God. For these two things can never harmonize together, to be cleansed by
the blood of Christ, and to be cleansed by works: for John assigns not the half, but the whole, to
the blood of Christ.
The sum of what is said, then, is, that the faithful know of a certainty, that they are accepted
by God, because he has been reconciled to them through the sacrifice of the death of Christ. And
sacrifice includes cleansing and satisfaction. Hence the power and efficiency of these belong to the
blood of Christ alone.
Hereby is disproved and exposed the sacrilegious invention of the Papists as to indulgences;
for as though the blood of Christ were not sufficient, they add, as a subsidy to it, the blood and
merits of martyrs. At the same time, this blasphemy advances much further among us; for as they
say that their keys, by which they hold as shut up the remission of sins, open a treasure made up
partly of the blood and merits of martyrs, and partly of the worlds of supererogation, by which any
sinner may redeem himself, no remission of sins remains for them but what is derogatory to the
blood of Christ; for if their doctrine stands, the blood of Christ does not cleanse us, but comes in,
as it were, as a partial aid. Thus consciences are held in suspense, which the Apostle here bids to
rely on the blood of Christ.
1 John 1:8-10
8. Si dixerimus quod peccatum non habemus,
nos ipsos decipimus, et veritas non est in nobis.8. If we say that we have no sin, we deceive
ourselves, and the truth is not in us.
9. Si confitemur peccata nostra, fidelis est et
justus, ut nobis peccata remittat; et purget nos ab
omni injustitia.9. If we confess our sins, he is faithful and
just to forgive us our sins, and to cleanse us from
all unrighteousness.
10. Si dixerimus quod non peccavimus,
mendacem facimus eum, et sermo ejus non est
in nobis.10. If we say that we have not sinned, we
make him a liar, and his word is not in us.
 
8. If we say.  He now commends grace from its necessity; for as no one is free from sin, he
intimates that we are all lost and undone, except the Lord comes to our aid with the remedy of
pardon. The reason why he so much dwells on the fact, that no one is innocent, is, that all may now
fully know that they stand in need of mercy, to deliver them from punishment, and that they may
thus be more roused to seek the necessary blessing.
102John Calvin Comm on Catholic Epistles
By the word sin, is meant here not only corrupt and vicious inclination, but the fault or sinful
act which really renders us guilty before God. Besides, as it is a universal declaration, it follows,
that none of the saints, who exist now, have been, or shall be, are exempted from the number. Hence
most fitly did Augustine refute the cavil of the Pelagians, by adducing against them this passage:
and he wisely thought that the confession of guilt is not required for humility’s sake, but lest we
by lying should deceive ourselves.
When he adds, and the truth is not in us , he confirms, according to his usual manner, the former
sentence by repeating it in other words; though it is not a simple repetition, (as elsewhere,) but he
says that they are deceived who glory in falsehood.
9If we confess  He again promises to the faithful that God will be propitious to them, provided
they acknowledge themselves to be sinners . It is of great moment to be fully persuaded, that when
we have sinned, there is a reconciliation with God ready and prepared for us: we shall otherwise
carry always a hell within us. Few, indeed, consider how miserable and wretched is a doubting
conscience; but the truth is, that hell reigns where there is no peace with God. The more, then, it
becomes us to receive with the whole heart this promise which offers free pardon to all who confess
their sins. Moreover, this is founded even on the justice of God, because God who promises is true
and just. For they who think that he is called just, because he justifies us freely, reason, as I think,
with too much refinement, because justice or righteousness here depends on fidelity, and both are
annexed to the promise. For God might have been just, were he to deal with us with all the rigor
of justice; but as he has bound himself to us by his word, he would not have himself deemed just,
except he forgives. 61
But this confession, as it is made to God, must be in sincerity; and the heart cannot speak to
God without newness of life. It then includes true repentance. God, indeed, forgives freely, but in
such a way, that the facility of mercy does not become an enticement to sin.
And to cleanse us  The verb, to cleanse , seems to be taken in another sense than before; for he
had said, that we are cleansed by the blood of Christ, because through him sins are not imputed;
but now, having spoken of pardon, he also adds, that God cleanses us from iniquity: so that this
second clause is different from the preceding. Thus he initiates that a twofold fruit comes to us
from confession, — that God being reconciled by the sacrifice of Christ, forgives us, — and that
he renews and reforms us.
Were any one to object and say, that as long as we sojourn in the world, we are never cleansed
from all unrighteousness, with regard to our reformation: this is indeed true; but John does not refer
to what God now performs in us. He is faithful, he says, to cleanse us, not today or tomorrow; for
as long as we are surrounded with flesh, we ought to be in a continual state of progress; but what
he has once begun, he goes on daily to do, until he at length completes it. So Paul says, that we are
chosen, that we may appear without blame before God, ( Colossians 1:22 ;) and in another place he
says, that the Church is cleansed, that it might be without spot or wrinkle. ( Ephesians 5:27 .)
61 “Faithful” and “just” are nearly of the same import, having both a regard to God’s promise , only the latter affords a stronger
or an additional ground of confidence, inasmuch as the fulfillment of God’s gracious promise is set forth as an act of justice. So
that the penitent has here two of God’s attributes, faithfulness and justice, to encourage and support his faith.
We may, at the same time, consider “just” as having reference to forgiveness, and “faithful” to cleansing, according to a
very common mode of stating things both in the Old and New Testament, the order in the second clause being reversed. Then
“just” means the same as when Paul says, “that he might be just and the justifier of him that believeth in Jesus,” Romans 3:26 .
Forgiveness is thus an act of justice, then, not to us, but to Christ, who made an atonement for sins. — Ed.
103John Calvin Comm on Catholic Epistles
If yet any one prefers another explanation, that he says the same thing twice over, I shall not
object. 62
10We make him a liar  He goes still further, that they who claim purity for themselves blaspheme
God. For we see that he everywhere represents the whole race of man as guilty of sin.
Whosoever then tries to escape this charge carries on war with God, and accuses him of
falsehood, as though he condemned the undeserving. To confirm this he adds, and his word is not
in us ; as though he had said, that we reject this great truth, that all are under guilt.
We hence learn, that we then only make a due progress in the knowledge of the word of the
Lord, when we become really humbled, so as to groan under the burden of our sins and learn to
flee to the mercy of God, and acquiesce in nothing else but in his paternal favor.
