---
layout: calvin-chapter
book_id: 2timothy
book_name: 提摩太后书
chapter: 1
section: "1"
section_title: "第1章"
sections_list: "introduction,1,2,3,4"
total_chapters: 4
header-img: psalm-bg-mountain.jpg
date: 2026-04-30 20:25
---

CHAPTER 1
2 Timothy 1:1-2
1. Paulus apostolus Iesu Christi per
voluntatem Dei, secundum promissionem vitae,
quae est in Christo Iesu,1. Paul, an apostle of Jesus Christ by the will
of God, according to the promise of life which is
in Christ Jesus,
2. Timotheo dilecto filio gratia, misericordia,
pax a Deo Patre, et Christo Iesu Domino nostro.2. To Timothy, my dearly beloved son: Grace,
mercy; and peace, from God the Father and
Christ Jesus our Lord.
1Paul an Apostle  From the very preface we already perceive that Paul had not in view Timothy
alone; other wise he would not have employed such lofty titles in asserting his apostleship; for what
purpose would it have served to employ these ornaments of language in writing to one who was
fully convinced of the fact? He, therefore, lays claim to that authority over all which belonged to
his public character and he does this the more diligently, because, being near death, he wishes to
secure the approbation of the whole course of his ministry, 135 and to seal his doctrine which he had
135 “Although, in all that Paul has left us in writing, we must consider that it is God who speaks to us by the mouth of a mortal
man, and that all his doctrine ought to be received with such authority and reverence as if God visibly appeared from heaven,
yet still there is in this epistle a special object to be kept in view, that Paul, being in prison and perceiving his death to be at hand,
wished to ratify his faith, as if he had sealed it with his blood. So then, as often as we read this epistle, let the condition in which
labored so hard to teach, that it may be held sacred by posterity, and to leave a true portrait of it in
Timothy.
Of Jesus Christ by the will of God  First, according to his custom, he calls himself an “Apostle
of Christ.” Hence it follows, that he does not speak as a private person, and must not be heard
slightly, and for form’s sake, 136 like a man, but as one who is a representative of Christ. But because
the dignity of the office is too great to belong to any man, except by the special gift and election
of God, he at the same time pronounces a eulogy on his calling, by adding that he was ordained by
the will of God  His apostleship, therefore, having God for its author and defender, is beyond all
dispute.
According to the promise of life  That his calling may be the more certain, he connects it with
the promises of eternal life; as if he had said, “As from the beginning God promised eternal life in
Christ, so now he has appointed me to be the minister for proclaiming that promise.” Thus also he
points out the design of his apostleship, namely, to bring men to Christ, that in him they may find
life.
Which is in Christ Jesus  He speaks with great accuracy, when he mentions that “the promise
of life” was indeed given, in ancient times, to the fathers. ( Acts 26:6 .) But yet he declares that this
life is in Christ, in order to inform us that the faith of those who lived under the Law must
nevertheless have looked towards Christ; and that life, which was contained in promises, was, in
some respects, suspended, till it was exhibited in Christ.
2My beloved son  By this designation he not only testifies his love of Timothy, but procures
respect and submission to him; because he wishes to be acknowledged in him, as one who may
justly be called his son, 137 The reason of the appellation is, that he had begotten him in Christ; for,
although this honor belongs to God alone, yet it is also transferred to ministers, whose agency he
employs for regenerating us.
Grace, mercy  The word mercy , which he employs here, is commonly left out by him in his
ordinary salutations. I think that he introduced it, when he poured out his feelings with more than
ordinary vehemence. Moreover, he appears to have inverted the order; for, since “mercy” is the
cause of “grace,” it ought to have come before it in this passage. But still it is not unsuitable that
it should be put after “grace”, in order to express more clearly what is the nature of that grace, and
whence it proceeds; as if he had added, in the form of a declaration, that the reason why we are
loved by God is, that he is merciful. Yet this may also be explained as relating to God’s daily
benefits, which are so many testimonies of his “mercy”; for, whenever he assists us, whenever he
delivers us from evils, pardons our sins, and bears with our weakness, he does so, because he has
compassion on us.
Paul was at that time come before our eyes, namely, that he was looking for nothing but to die for the testimony of the gospel
(which he actually did) as its standard-bearer, in order to give us stronger assurance of his doctrine, and that will affect us in a
more lively manner. Indeed, if we read this epistle carefully, we shall find that the Spirit of God has expressed himself in it in
such a manner, with such majesty and power, that we are constrained to be captivated and overwhelmed. For my own part, I
know that this epistle has been more profitable to me than any other book of Scripture, and still is profitable to me every day;
and if any person shall examine it carefully, there can be no doubt that he will experience the same effect. And if we desire to
have a testimony of the truth of God, which pierces our heart, we may well fix on this epistle; for a man must be in a profound
sleep, and remarkably stupid, if God do not work in his soul, when he hears the doctrine that shall be drawn from it.”- Fr. Ser.
136 “Oui par acquit .”
137 “Comme en celuy qui pent a bon droict estre nomme son fils .”
2 Timothy 1:3-5
3. Gratias ago Deo, quem colo a
progenitoribus in conscientia, ut assiduam tui
mentionem facio in pecibus meis die et noctu,3. I thank God, whom I serve from my
forefathers with pure conscience, that without
ceasing I have remembrance of thee in my
prayers night and day;
4. Desiderans to videre, memor tuarum
lacrymarum, ut gaudio implear,4. Greatly desiring to see thee, being mindful
of thy tears, that I may be filled with joy;
5. Memoria repetens eam, quae in to est,
sinceram fidem, quae et habitavit primum in avia5. When I call to remembrance the unfeigned
faith that is in thee, which dwelt first in thy
tua Loide, et in matre tua Eunice; persuasum
habeo quòd etiam in to.grandmother Lois, and thy mother Eunice; and I
am persuaded that in thee also.
3 I give thanks  The meaning usually assigned to these words is, that Paul “gives thanks to
God,” and next assigns the cause or ground of thanksgiving; namely, that he is unceasingly mindful
of Timothy. But let my readers consider whether the following sense do not suit equally well and
even better: “Whenever I remember thee in my prayers, (and I do so continually,) I also give thanks
concerning thee;” for the particle    most frequently has that meaning; 138 and, indeed, any meaning
that can be drawn from a different translation is exceedingly meager. According to this exposition,
prayer will be a sign of carefulness, and thanksgiving a sign of joy; that is, he never thought of
Timothy without calling to remembrance the eminent virtues with which he was adorned. Hence
arises ground of thanksgiving; for the recollection of the gifts of God is always pleasant and delightful
to believers. Both are proofs of real friendship. He calls the mention of him (           ) unceasing,
because he never forgets him when he prays.
Whom I worship from my ancestors  This declaration he made in opposition to those well-known
calumnies with which the Jews everywhere loaded him, as if he had forsaken the religion of his
country, and apostatized from the law of Moses. On the contrary, he declares that he worships God,
concerning whom he had been taught by his ancestors, that is, the God of Abraham, who revealed
himself to the Jews, who delivered his law by the hand of Moses; and not some pretended God,
whom he had lately made for himself.
But here it may be asked, “Since Paul glories in following the religion handed down from his
ancestors, is this a sufficiently solid foundation? For hence it follows, that this will be a plausible
presence for excusing all superstitions, and that it will be a crime, if any one depart, in the smallest
degree, from the institutions of his ancestors, whatever these are.” The answer is easy. He does not
here lay down a fixed rule, that every person who follows the religion that he received from his
fathers is believed to worship God aright, and, on the other hand, that he who departs from the
custom of his ancestors is at all to blame for it. For this circumstance must always be taken into
account, that Paul was not descended from idolaters, but from the children of Abraham, who
worshipped the true God. We know what Christ says, in disapproving of all the false worship of
the Gentiles, that the Jews alone maintained the true method of worship. Paul, therefore, does not
rest solely on the authority of the fathers, nor does he speak indiscriminately of all his ancestors;
138 “Car le mot Grec se prend plus souvent pour Comme .” — “For the Greek word generally signifies as.”
but he removes that false opinion, with which he knew that he was unjustly loaded, that he had
forsaken the God of Israel, and framed for himself a strange god.
In a pure conscience  It is certain that Paul’s conscience was not always pure; for he
acknowledges that he was deceived by hypocrisy, while he gave loose reins to sinful desire. 139
(Romans 7:8 .) The excuse which Chrysostom offers for what Paul did while he was a Pharisee, on
the ground that he opposed the gospel, not through malice, but through ignorance, is not a satisfactory
reply to the objection; for “a pure conscience” is no ordinary commendation, and cannot be separated
from the sincere and hearty fear of God. I, therefore, limit it to the present time, in this manner,
that he worships the same God as was worshipped by his ancestors, but that now he worships him
with pure affection of the heart, since the time when he was enlightened by the gospel.
This statement has the same object with the numerous protestations of the apostles, as recorded
in the Acts of the Apostles:
“I serve the God of my fathers, believing all things that are written in the law and in the
prophets.” ( Acts 24:14 .)
Again,
“And now I stand to be judged concerning the hope of the promise which was made to our
fathers, to which hope our twelve tribes hope to come.” ( Acts 26:6 .)
Again,
“On account of the hope of Israel I am bound with this chain.” ( Acts 28:20 .)
In my prayers night and day  Hence we see how great was his constancy in prayer; and yet he
affirms nothing about himself but what Christ recommends to all his followers. We ought, therefore,
to be moved and inflamed by such examples to imitate them, so far, at least, that an exercise so
necessary may be more frequent among us. If any one understand this to mean the daily and nightly
prayers which Paul was wont to offer at stated hours, there will be no impropriety in that view;
though I give a more simple interpretation, that there was no time when he was not employed in
prayer.
5Calling to remembrance that unfeigned faith  Not so much for the purpose of applauding as
of exhorting Timothy, the Apostle commends both his own faith and that of his grandmother and
mother; for, when one has begun well and valiantly, the progress he has made should encourage
him to advance, and domestic examples are powerful excitements to urge him forward. Accordingly,
he sets before him his grandmother Lois and his mother Eunice, by whom he had been educated
from his infancy in such a manner that he might have sucked godliness along with his milk. By
this godly education, therefore, Timothy is admonished not to degenerate from himself and from
his ancestors.
It is uncertain whether, on the one hand, these women were converted to Christ, and what Paul
here applauds was the commencement of faith, or whether, on the other hand, faith is attributed to
them apart from Christianity. The latter appears to me more probable; for, although at that time
everything abounded with many superstitions and corruptions, yet God had always his own people,
whom he did not suffer to be corrupted with the multitude, but whom he sanctified and separated
to himself, that there might always exist among the Jews a pledge of this grace, which he had
promised to the seed of Abraham. There is, therefore, no absurdity in saying that they lived and
139 “Quand il se laschoit la bride a convoiter, comme si la chose n’eust point illicite .” — “When he gave loose reins to lust, as
if it had not been an unlawful thing.”
died in the faith of the Mediator, although Christ had not yet been revealed to them. But I do not
assert anything, and could not assert without rashness.
And I am persuaded that in thee also  This clause confirms me in the conjecture which I have
just now stated; for, in my opinion, he does not here speak of the present faith of Timothy. It would
lessen that sure confidence of the former eulogium, if he only said that he reckoned the faith of
Timothy to resemble the faith of his grandmother and mother. But I understand the meaning to be,
that Timothy, from his childhood, while he had not yet obtained a knowledge of the gospel, was
imbued with the fear of God, and with such faith as proved to be a living seed, which afterwards
manifested itself.
2 Timothy 1:6-12
6. Propterea commonefacio to, ut exsuscites
donum Dei, quod in to est, per impositionem
manuum mearum6. Wherefore I put thee in remembrance that
thou stir up the gift of God, which is in thee by
the putting on of my hands.
7. Non enim dedit nobis Deus spiritum
timiditatis, sed pontenia et dilectionis et
sobrietatis.7. For God hath not given us the spirit of fear;
but of power, and of love, and of a sound mind.
8. Non ergo to pudeat testimonii Domini
nostri, neque mei, qui sum vinctus ipsius; sed8. Be not thou therefore ashamed of the
testimony of our Lord, nor of me his prisoner:
esto particeps aflictionum Evangelii, secundum
potentiam Dei,but be thou partaker of the afflictions of the
gospel according to the power of God;
9. Qui nos servavit ac vocavit vocatione
sancta; non secundum opera nostra, sed9. Who hath saved us, and called us with an
holy calling, not according to our works, but
secundum propositum suum et gratiam, quae data
fuit nobis in Christo Iesu ante tempora saeculariaaccording to his own purpose and grace, which
was given us in Christ Jesus before the world
began,
10. Revelata autem nunc fuit per
apparitionem Servatoris nostri Iesu Christi, qui10. But is now made manifest by the
appearing of our Saviour Jesus Christ, who hath
mortem quidem abolevit, illuminavit autem vitam
et immortalitatem per Evangeliumabolished death, and hath brought life and
immortality to light through the gospel:
11. In quod positus sum ego praeco et
apostolus et Doctor Gentium,11. Whereunto I am appointed a preacher,
and an apostle, and a teacher of the Gentiles.
12. Quam etiam ob causam haec patior, sed
non pudefio; novi enim, cui crediderim, et12. For the which cause I also suffer these
things: nevertheless I am not ashamed: for I know
persuasus sum quod potens sit, depositum meum
servare in diem illum.whom I have believed, and am persuaded that he
is able to keep that which I have committed unto
him against that day.
6For which cause I advise thee  The more abundantly that Timothy had received the grace of
God, the more attentive (the Apostle intimates) he ought to be in making progress from day to day.
It deserves notice that the words “for which cause” introduce this advice as a conclusion from what
has been already said.
To stir up the gift of God . This exhortation is highly necessary; for it usually happens, and may
be said to be natural, that the excellence of gifts produces carelessness, which is also accompanied
by sloth; and Satan continually labors to extinguish all that is of God in us. We ought, therefore,
on the other hand, to strive to bring to perfection everything that is good in us, and to kindle what
is languid; for the metaphor, which Paul employs, is taken from a fire which was feeble, or that
was in course of being gradually extinguished, if strength and flame were not added, by blowing
upon it and by supplying new fuel. Let us therefore remember that we ought to apply to use the
gifts of God, lest, being unemployed and concealed, they gather rust. Let us also remember that
we should diligently profit by them, lest they be extinguished by our slothfulness.
Which is in thee by the laying on of my hands  There can be no doubt that Timothy was invited
by the general voice of the Church, and was not elected by the private wish of Paul alone; but there
is no absurdity in saying, that Paul ascribes the election to himself personally, because he was the
chief actor in it. Yet here he speaks of ordination, that is, of the solemn act of conferring the office
of the ministry, and not of election. Besides, it is not perfectly clear whether it was the custom,
when any minister was to be set apart, that all laid their hands on his head, or that one only did so,
in the room and name of all. I am more inclined to the conjecture, that it was only one person who
laid on his hands.
So far as relates to the ceremony, the apostles borrowed it from an ancient custom of their
nation; or rather, in consequence of its being in use, they retained it; for this is a part of that decent
and orderly procedure which Paul elsewhere recommends. ( 1 Corinthians 14:40 .) Yet it may be
doubted if that “laying on of hands” which is now mentioned refers to ordination; because, at that
time, the graces of the Spirit, of which he speaks in the 12th chapter of the Epistle to the Romans
(Romans 12 ), and in the 13th of the First Epistle to the Corinthians ( 1 Corinthians 13 ), were bestowed
on many others who were not appointed to be pastors. But, for my own part, I think that it may be
easily inferred from the former Epistle, that Paul here speaks of the office of a pastor, for this
passage agrees with that,
“Do not neglect the grace which was given to thee with the laying on of the hands of the
eldership.” ( 1 Timothy 4:14 .)
That point being settled, it is asked, “Was grace given by the outward sign?” To this question
I answer, whenever ministers were ordained, they were recommended to God by the prayers of the
whole Church, and in this manner grace from God was obtained for them by prayer, and was not
given to them by virtue of the sign, although the sign was not uselessly or unprofitably employed,
but was a sure pledge of that grace which they received from God’s own hand. That ceremony was
not a profane act, invented for the sole purpose of procuring credit in the eyes of men, but a lawful
consecration before God, which is not performed but by the power of the Holy Spirit. Besides, Paul
takes the sign for the whole matter or the whole transaction; for he declares that Timothy was
endued with grace, when he was offered to God as a minister. Thus in this mode of expression there
is a figure of speech, in which a part is taken for the whole.
But we are again met by another question; for if it was only at his ordination that Timothy
obtained the grace necessary for discharging his office, of what nature was the election of a man
not yet fit or qualified, but hitherto void and destitute of the gift of God? I answer, it was not then
so given to him that he had it not before; for it is certain that he excelled both in doctrine and in
other gifts before Paul ordained him to the ministry. But there is no inconsistency in saying, that,
when God wished to make use of his services, and accordingly called him, he then fitted and
enriched him still more with new gifts, or doubled those which he had previously bestowed. It does
not therefore follow that Timothy had not formerly any gift, but it shone forth the more when the
duty of teaching was laid upon him.
7For God hath not given to us a spirit of cowardice  It is a confirmation of what he had said
immediately before; and thus he continues to urge Timothy to display the power of the gifts which
he had received. He makes use of this argument, that God governs his ministers by the Spirit of
power, which is the opposite of cowardice. Hence it follows, that they ought not to lie down through
slothfulness, but, sustained by great confidence and cheerfulness, should exhibit and display, by
visible effects, that power of the Spirit.
The following passage occurs in the Epistle to the Romans:
“For we have not received a spirit of bondage, to be again in terror; but we have received the
spirit of adoption, by which we cry, Abba, Father.” ( Romans 8:15 .)
That passage is, at first sight, nearly similar to this; but yet the context shews that the meaning
is different. There he treats of the confidence of adoption which all believers have; but here he
speaks particularly about ministers, and exhorts them, in the person of Timothy, to arouse themselves
actively to deeds of valor; because God does not wish them to perform their office in a cold and
lifeless manner, but to press forward powerfully, relying on the efficacy of the Spirit.
But of power, and of love, and of soberness  Hence we are taught, first, that not one of us
possesses that firmness and unshaken constancy of the Spirit, which is requisite for fulfilling our
ministry, until we are endued from heaven with a new power. And indeed the obstructions are so
many and so great, that no courage of man will be able to overcome them. It is God, therefore, who
endues us with “the spirit of power;” for they who, in other respects, give tokens of much strength,
fall down in a moment, when they are not upheld by the power of the Divine Spirit.
Secondly, we gather from it, that they who have slavish meanness and cowardice, so that they
do not venture to do anything in defense of the truth, when it is necessary, are not governed by that
Spirit by whom the servants of Christ are guided. Hence it follows, that there are very few of those
who bear the title of ministers, in the present day, who have the mark of sincerity impressed upon
them; for, amongst a vast number, where do we find one who, relying on the power of the Spirit,
boldly despises all the loftiness which exalts itself against Christ? Do not almost all seek their own
interest and their leisure? Do they not sink down dumb as soon as any noise breaks out? The
consequence is, that no majesty of God is seen in their ministry. The word Spirit is here employed
figuratively, as in many other passages. 140
But why did he afterwards add love and soberness? In my opinion, it was for the purpose of
distinguishing that power of the Spirit from the fury and rage of fanatics, who while they rush
forward with reckless impulse, fiercely boast of having the Spirit of God. For that reason he expressly
states that this powerful energy is moderated by “soberness and love,” that is, by a calm desire of
edifying. Yet Paul does not deny that prophets and teachers were endued with the same Spirit before
the publication of the gospel; but he declares that this grace ought now to be especially powerful
and conspicuous under the reign of Christ.
140 “Le mot d’ Esprit  est yci pries pout les dons qui en procedent, suy. vent la figure nommee Metonymie .” — “The word Spirit
is here taken for the gifts which proceed from him, agreeably to the figure called Metonymy.”
8Be not ashamed, therefore  He said this, because the confession of the gospel was accounted
infamous; and therefore he forbids that either ambition or the fear of disgrace shall prevent or retard
him from the liberty of preaching the gospel. And he infers this from what has been already said;
for he who is armed with the power of God will not tremble at the noise raised by the world, but
will reckon it honorable that wicked men mark them with disgrace.
And justly does he call the gospel the testimony of our Lord;  because, although he has no need
of our assistance, yet he lays upon us this duty, that we shall give “testimony” to him for maintaining
his glory. It is a great and distinguished honor which he confers upon us, and, indeed, upon all, (for
there is no Christian that ought not to reckon himself a witness of Christ,) but chiefly pastors and
teachers, as Christ said to the apostles, —
“Ye shall be witnesses to me,” ( Acts 1:8 .)
Accordingly, the more hateful the doctrine of the gospel is in the world, the more earnestly
should they labor to confess it openly.
When he adds, nor of me ; by this word he reminds Timothy not to refuse to be his companion,
as in a cause common to both of them; for, when we begin to withdraw from the society of those
who, for the name of Christ, suffer persecution, what else do we seek than that the gospel shall be
free from all persecution? Now, though there were not wanting many wicked men who thus ridiculed
Timothy, — “Do you not see what has befallen your master? Do you not know that the same reward
awaits you also? Why do you press upon us a doctrine which you see is hissed at by the whole
world?” — still he must have been cheered by this exhortation, — “You have no reason to be
ashamed of me, in that which is not shameful, for I am Christ’s prisoner;” that is, “Not for any
crime or evil deed, but for his name I am kept in prison.”
But be thou a partaker of the afflictions of the gospel  He lays down a method by which that
which he enjoins may be done; that is, if Timothy shall prepare himself for enduring the afflictions
which are connected with the gospel. Whosoever shall revolt at and shrink from the cross will
always be ashamed of the gospel. Not without good reason, therefore, does Paul, while he exhorts
to boldness of confession, in order that he may not exhort in vain, speak to him also about bearing
the cross. 141
He adds, according to the power of God; because, but for this, and if he did not support us, we
should immediately sink under the load. And this clause contains both admonition and consolation.
The admonition is, to turn away his eyes from his present weakness, and, relying on the assistance
of God, to venture and undertake what is beyond his strength. The consolation is, that, if we endure
anything on account of the gospel, God will come forth as our deliverer, that by his power, we may
obtain the victory.
141 “He shews, in the first place, that the gospel cannot be without afflictions. Not that God does not call all men to unity in
the faith, and the doctrine of the gospel is the message of reconciliation; but yet, on the one hand, there are those who are drawn
by the power of his Holy Spirit, while unbelievers remain in their hardness; and, on the other hand, there is the fire that is kindled,
as, when thunders are generated in the air, there must be great troubles, so is it when the gospel is preached. And now, if the
gospel brings afflictions, and if our Lord Jesus Christ wishes that what he endured in his person shall be fulfilled in his members,
and that every day he shall be, as it were, crucified, is it lawful for us to withdraw from that condition? Since, therefore, all our
hope lies in the gospel, and since we ought to lean upon it, let us ponder what Paul says, that we must lend support to our brethren,
when we see that they are assailed, that men trample them under their feet, spit in their face, and insult them, let us choose to be
their companions for enduring the reproaches and base conduct of the world, rather than to be honored, to be in good reputation
and credit, and yet to be estranged from those who suffer for the cause which we have in common with them.” — Fr. Ser.
9Who hath saved us  From the greatness of the benefit he shews how much we owe to God; for
the salvation which he has bestowed on us easily swallows up all the evils that must be endured in
this world. The word saved,  though it admit of a general signification, is here limited, by the context,
to denote eternal salvation. So then he means that they who, having obtained through Christ not a
fading or transitory, but an eternal salvation, shall spare their fleeting life or honor rather than
acknowledge their Redeemer; are excessively ungrateful.
And hath called us with a holy calling  He places the sealing of salvation 142 in the calling; for,
as the salvation of men was completed in the death of Christ, so God, by the gospel, makes us
partakers of it. In order to place in a stronger light the value of this “calling,” he pronounces it to
be holy. This ought to be carefully observed, because, as salvation must not be sought anywhere
but in Christ; so, on the other hand, he would have died and risen again without any practical
advantage, unless so far as he calls us to a participation of this grace. Thus, after having procured
salvation for us, this second blessing remains to be bestowed, that, ingrafting us into his body, he
may communicate his benefits to be enjoyed by us.
Not according to our works, but according to his purpose and grace  He describes the source
both of our calling and of the whole of our salvation. We had not works by which we could anticipate
God; but the whole depends on his gracious purpose and election; for in the two words purpose
and grace there is the figure of speech called Hypallage, 143 and the latter must have the force of
an objection, as if he had said, — “according to his gracious purpose.” Although Paul commonly
employs the word “purpose” to denote the secret decree of God, the cause of which is in his own
power, yet, for the sake of fuller explanation, he chose to add “grace,” that he might more clearly
exclude all reference to works. And the very contrast proclaims loudly enough that there is no room
for works where the grace of God reigns, especially when we are reminded of the election of God,
by which he was beforehand with us, when we had not yet been born. On this subject I have spoken
more fully in my exposition of the first chapter of the Epistle to the Ephesians; and at present I do
nothing more than glance briefly at that which I have there treated more at large. 144
Which was given to us  From the order of time he argues, that, by free grace, salvation was given
to us which we did not at all deserve; for, if God chose us before the creation of the world, he could
not have regard to works, of which we had none, seeing that we did not then exist. As to the cavil
of the sophists, that God was moved by the works which he foresaw, it does not need a long
refutation. What kind of works would those have been if God had passed us by, seeing that the
election itself is the source and beginning of all good works?
This giving  of grace, which he mentions, is nothing else than predestination, by which we were
adopted to be the sons of God. On this subject I wished to remind my readers, because God is
frequently said actually to “give” his grace to us when we receive the effect of it. But here Paul
sets before us what God purposed with himself from the beginning. He, therefore, gave that which,
not induced by any merit, he appointed to those who were not yet born, and kept laid up in his
treasures, until he made known by the fact itself that he purposeth nothing in vain.
142 “La certitude de salut .” — “The certainty of salvation.”
143A figure of speech, by which the parts of a proposition seem to be interchanged, ὑπαλλαγή  compounded of ν̔πό and ἀλλάσσω
`I change.’- Ed.
144 See Calvin’s Commentaries on Galatians and Ephesians, pp. 197-201 . --Ed.
Before eternal ages  He employs this phrase in the same sense in which he elsewhere speaks of
the uninterrupted succession of years from the foundation of the world. ( Titus 1:2 .) For that ingenious
reasoning which Augustine conducts in many passages is totally different from Paul’s design. The
meaning therefore is, — “Before times began to take their course from all past ages.” Besides, it
is worthy of notice, that he places the foundation of salvation in Christ; for, apart from him, there
is neither adoption nor salvation; as was indeed said in expounding the first chapter of the Epistle
to the Ephesians.
10But hath now been revealed by the appearing of our Savior Jesus Christ  Observe how
appropriately he connects the faith which we have from the gospel within God’s secret election,
and assigns to each of them its own place. God has now called us by the gospel, not because he has
suddenly taken counsel about our salvation, but because he had so determined from all eternity.
Christ hath now “appeared” 145 for our salvation, not because the power of saving has been recently
bestowed on him, but because this grace was laid up in him for us before the creation of the world.
The knowledge of those things is revealed to us by faith; and so the Apostle judiciously connects
the gospel with the most ancient promises of God, that novelty may not render it contemptible.
But it is asked; “Were the fathers under the Law ignorant of this grace?” for if it was not revealed
but by the coming of Christ, it follows that, before that time, it was concealed. I reply, Paul speaks
of the full exhibition of the thing itself on which depended also the faith of the fathers, so that this
takes nothing from them. The reason why Abel, Noah, Abraham, Moses, David, and all believers,
obtained the same faith with us, was, that they placed their confidence in this “appearance.” Thus,
when he says that “grace hath been revealed to us by the appearing of Christ,” he does not exclude
from communion with that grace the fathers who are made partakers with us of this appearing by
the same faith. Christ ( Hebrews 13:8 ) was yesterday as he is today; but he did not manifest himself
to us, by his death and resurrection, before the time appointed by the Father. To this, as the only
pledge and accomplishment of our salvation, both our faith and that of the fathers look with one
accord.
Who hath indeed destroyed death  When he ascribes to the gospel the manifestation of life, he
does not mean that we must begin with the word, leaving out of view the death and resurrection of
Christ, (for the word, on the contrary, rests on the subject-matter,) but he only means that the fruit
of this grace comes to men in no other way than by the gospel, in accordance with what is said,
“God was in Christ, reconciling the world to himself, and hath committed to us the ministry of
reconciliation.”
(2 Corinthians 5:19 .)
And hath brought to light life and immortality by the gospel  It is a high and remarkable
commendation of the gospel, that it “bringeth life to light.” To life he adds immortality; as if he
had said, “a true and immortal life.” But, perhaps, it may be thought better, that by life we understand
regeneration, that is followed by a blessed immortality which is also the object of hope. And, indeed,
this is our “life,” not that which we have in common with brute beasts, but that which consists in
partaking of the image of God. But because in this world
145τὢς ἐπιφανείας . “This Theodoret well explains by ἐνανθρωπήσεως , the expression being one especially used by the ancient
writers, of the appearance of the gods on earth. So Joseph. Ant. 18. 3. 4, we have τὴν ἐπιφάνειαν ἐχδιηγεῖται τοῦ Ανούβιδος
[she relates the appearing of (the god) Anubis.] ᾿Επιφάνεια  here denotes Christ’s first appearance in the flesh though elsewhere
the term always means his second appearance to judge the world.” -- Bloomfield.
“it doth not appear” ( 1 John 3:2 )
what is the nature, or what is the value of that “life,” for the sake of more full expression he
has most properly added, “immortality,” which is the revelation of that life which is now concealed.
11To which I have been appointed  Not without good reason does he so highly commend the
gospel along with his apostleship. Satan labors, beyond all things else, to banish from our hearts,
by every possible method, the faith of sound doctrine; and as it is not always easy for him to do
this if he attack us in open war, he steals upon us by secret and indirect methods; for, in order to
destroy the credibility of doctrine, he holds up to suspicion the calling of godly teachers. 146 Paul,
therefore, having death before his eyes, and knowing well the ancient and ordinary snares of Satan,
determined to assert not only the doctrine of the gospel in general, but his own calling. Both were
necessary; for, although there be uttered long discourses concerning the dignity of the gospel, they
will not be of much avail to us, unless we understand what is the gospel. Many will agree as to the
general principle of the undoubted authority of the gospel, who afterwards will have nothing certain
that they can follow. This is the reason why Paul expressly wishes to be acknowledged to be a
faithful and lawful minister of that life-giving doctrine which he had mentioned.
A herald, and an apostle, and a teacher of the Gentiles  For the reasons now stated, he adorns
himself with various titles for expressing one and the same thing. He calls himself a herald, whose
duty it is, to publish the commands of princes and magistrates. The word apostle is here used in its
ordinary and restricted meaning. Moreover, because there is a natural relation between a teacher
and his disciples, he takes to himself also this third name, that they who learn from him may know
that they have a master who has been appointed to them by God. And to whom does he declare
that he was appointed? To the Gentiles; for the main hinge of the controversy was about them,
because the Jews denied that the promises of life belonged to any others than to the fleshly children
of Abraham. In order, therefore, that the salvation of the Gentiles may not be called in question,
he affirms that to them he has been especially sent by God.
12 For which cause also I suffer these things  It is well known that the rage of the Jews was
kindled against Paul, for this reason more than any other, that he made the gospel common to the
Gentiles. Yet the phrase for which cause relates to the whole verse, and therefore must not be limited
to the last clause about “the Gentiles.”
But I am not ashamed  That the prison in which he was bound might not in any degree lessen
his authority, he contends, on the contrary, by two arguments. First, he shows that the cause, far
from being disgraceful, was even honorable to him; for he was a prisoner, not on account of any
evil deed, but because he obeyed God who called him. It is an inconceivable consolation, when we
are able to bring a good conscience in opposition to the unjust judgments of men. Secondly, from
the hope of a prosperous issue he argues that there is nothing disgraceful in his imprisonment. He
who shall avail himself of this defense will be able to overcome any temptations, however great
they may be. And when he says, that he “is not ashamed,” he stimulates others, by his example, to
have the same courage.
For I know whom I have believed  This is the only place of refuge, to which all believers ought
to resort, whenever the world reckons them to be condemned and ruined men; namely, to reckon
it enough that God approves of them; for what would be the result, if they depended on men? And
hence we ought to infer how widely faith differs from opinion; because, when Paul says, “I know
146 “Des Docteurs ou Pasteurs fideles .” — “Of faithful Teachers or Pastors.”
whom I have believed,” he means that it is not enough if you believe, unless you have the testimony
of God, and unless you have full certainty of it. Faith, therefore, neither leans on the authority of
men, nor rests on God, in such a manner as to hesitate, but must be joined with knowledge; otherwise
it would not be sufficiently strong against the innumerable assaults of Satan. He who with Paul
enjoys this knowledge, will know, by experience, that, on good grounds, our faith is called
“the victory that overcometh the world,” ( 1 John 5:4 )
and that on good grounds, it was said by Christ,
“The gates of hell shall not prevail against it.”
(Matthew 16:18 .)
Amidst every storm and tempest, that man will enjoy undisturbed repose, who has a settled
conviction that God,
“who cannot lie,” ( Titus 1:2 )
or deceive, hath spoken, and will undoubtedly perform what he hath promised. On the other
hand, he who has not this truth sealed on his heart, will be continually shaken hither and thither
like a reed.
This passage is highly worthy of attention; because it expresses admirably the power of faith,
when it shows that, even in desperate affairs, we ought to give to God such glory as not to doubt
that he will be true and faithful; and when it likewise shows that we ought to rely on the word as
fully as if God had manifested himself to us from heaven; for he who has not this conviction
understands nothing. Let us always remember that Paul does not pursue philosophical speculations
in the shade, but, having the reality before his eyes, solemnly declares, how highly valuable is a
confident hope of eternal life.
And am persuaded that he is able  Because the power and greatness of dangers often fill us with
dismay, or at least tempt our hearts to distrust, for this reason we must defend ourselves with this
shield, that there is sufficient protection in the power of God. In like manner Christ, when he bids
us cherish confident hope, employs this argument,
“The Father, who gave you to me, is greater than all,”
(John 10:29 )
by which he means, that we are out of danger, seeing that the Lord, who hath taken us under
his protection, is abundantly powerful to put down all opposition. True, Satan does not venture to
suggest this thought in a direct form, that God cannot fulfill, or is prevented from fulfilling, what
he has promised, (for our senses are shocked by so gross a blasphemy against God,) but, by
preoccupying our eyes and understandings, he takes away from us all sense of the power of God.
The heart must therefore be well purified, in order that it may not only taste that power, but may
retain the taste of it amidst temptations of every kind.
Now, whenever Paul speaks of the power of God, understand by it what may be called his actual
or (       μ  μ ) “effectual” power, as he calls it elsewhere. ( Colossians 1:29 ) Faith always connects
the power of God with the word, which it does not imagine to be at a distance, but, having inwardly
conceived it, possesses and retains it. Thus it is said of Abraham:
“He did not hesitate or dispute, but gave glory to God, being fully convinced that what he had
promised he was able also to perform,” ( Romans 4:20,21 .)
What I have intrusted to him  Observe that he employs this phrase to denote eternal life; for
hence we conclude, that our salvation is in the hand of God, in the same manner as there are in the
hand of a depository those things which we deliver to him to keep, relying on his fidelity. If our
salvation depended on ourselves, 147 to how many dangers would it be continually exposed? But
now it is well that, having been committed to such a guardian, it is out of all danger.
2 Timothy 1:13-18
13. Formam habe sanorum sermonum, quos
a me audisti in fide et caritate, in Christo Iesu.13. Hold fast the form of sound words, which
thou hast heard of me, in faith and love which is
in Christ Jesus.
14. Eregium depositum custodi per Spiritum
Sanctum, qui inhabitat in nobis.14. That good thing which was committed
unto thee keep by the Holy Ghost which dwelleth
in us.
15. Nosti hoc, quod aversati me fuerint
omnes, qui sunt in Asia, quorum sunt Phygelus
et Hermogenes.15. This thou knowest, that all they which are
in Asia be turned away from me; of whom are
Phygellus and Hermogenes.
16. Det misericordiam Dominus Onesiphori
familiae; quoniam saepe me refocillait, et de
catena mea non erubuit:16. The Lord give mercy unto the house of
Onesiphorus; for he oft refreshed me, and was
not ashamed of my chain:
17. Sed quum esset Romae, studiosus
quaesivit me, et invenit.17. But when he was in Rome, he sought me
out very diligently, and found me
18. Det ei Dominus invenire misericordiam
a Domino in illa die et quanta Ephesi ministravit
melius tu nosti.18. The Lord grant unto him that he may find
mercy of the Lord in that day: and in how many
things he ministered unto me at Ephesus, thou
knowest very well.
13Hold the form of sound words  Some explain it thus: “Let thy doctrine be, as it were, a pattern
which others may imitate.” I do not approve of that view. Equally removed from Paul’s meaning
is Chrysostom’s exposition, that Timothy should have at hand the image of virtues engraven on
his heart by Paul’s doctrine. I rather think that Paul commands Timothy to hold fast the doctrine
which he had learned, not only as to substance, but as to the very form of expression; for            —
the word which Paul employs on this occasion — denotes a lively picture of objects, as if they were
actually placed before the eyes. Paul knew how ready men are to depart or fall off from pure
doctrine. For this reason he earnestly cautions Timothy not to turn aside from that form of teaching
which he had received, and to regulate his manner of teaching by the rule which had been laid
down; not that we ought to be very scrupulous about words, but because to misrepresent doctrine,
even in the smallest degree, is exceedingly injurious. 148
147 “Si nostre salut dependoit de nous, et qu’il fust en nostre garde .” — “If our salvation depended on us, and were under our
protection.”
148 “He was not barely to assert the words of Scripture, but he was to hold fast the summary, or system of the truths he had
heard from his spiritual father, and, in a way of dependence on Christ, to show his fidelity and love to his Redeemer. This system
of doctrine he was to keep, as a pledge committed to his trust, by the help of the Holy Spirit. Ministers are to hold fast every
truth, but, above all, those particular truths which are the peculiar butt of the devil’s opposition, and meet with rough treatment
Hence we see what kind of theology there is in Popery, which has degenerated so far from the
pattern which Paul recommends, that it resembles the riddles of diviners or soothsayers rather than
a doctrine taken from the word of God. What taste of Paul’s writings, I ask, is there in all the books
of the schoolmen? This licentiousness in corrupting doctrine shews that there are great reasons why
Paul invites Timothy to hold fast the original and natural form. And he contrasts sound words not
only with doctrines manifestly wicked, but within useless questions, which, instead of health, bring
nothing but disease.
In faith and love, which is in Christ Jesus  I am aware that the preposition   , agreeably to the
idiom of the Hebrew language,   is often taken for with; but here, I think, the meaning is different
Paul has added this as a mark of sound doctrine, in order that we may know what it contains, and
what is the summary of it, the whole of which, according to his custom, he includes under “faith
and love.” He places both of them in Christ; as, indeed, the knowledge of Christ consists chiefly
of these two parts; for, although the words, which is, are in the singular number, agreeing with the
word love, yet it must also be understood as applying to faith.
Those who translate it, “ with faith and love,” make the meaning to be, that Timothy should add
to sound doctrine the affections of piety and love. I do acknowledge that no man can persevere
faithfully in sound doctrine unless he is endued with true faith and unfeigned love. But the former
exposition, in my opinion, is more appropriate, namely, that Paul employs these terms for describing
more fully what is the nature of “sound words” and what is the subject of them. Now he says that
the summary consists in “faith and love” of which the knowledge of Christ is the source and
beginning.
14Keep the excellent thing committed to thee  This exhortation is more extensive than the
preceding. He exhorts Timothy to consider what God has given to him, and to bestow care and
application in proportion to the high value of that which has been committed; for, when the thing
is of little value, we are not wont to call any one to so strict an account.
By “that which hath been committed,” I understand him to mean both the honor of the ministry
and all the gifts with which Timothy was endued. Some limit it to the ministry alone; but I think
that it denotes chiefly the qualifications for the ministry, that is, all the gifts of the Spirit, in which
he excelled. The word “committed” is employed also for another reason, to remind Timothy that
he must, one day, render an account; for we ought to administer faithfully what God has committed
to us.
         149 denotes that which is of high or singular value; and, therefore, Erasmus has happily
translated it ( egregium ) “excellent,” for the sake of denoting its rare worth. I have followed that
version. But what is the method of keeping it? It is this. We must beware lest we lose by our
indolence what God has bestowed upon us, or lest it be taken away, because we have been ungrateful
or have abused it; for there are many who reject the grace of God, and many who, after having
received it, deprive themselves of it altogether. Yet because the difficulty of keeping it is beyond
our strength, he therefore adds, —
By the Holy Spirit  As if he had said, “I do ask from thee more than thou canst, for what thou
hast not from thyself the Spirit of God will supply to thee.” Hence it follows, that we must not
in the times in which they live; so doing, they comply with the command which their exalted Master laid upon the pastor of the
Church at Philadelphia, and then they may hope for the blessing he promised. ( Revelation 3:8,10,11 .)” — Abraham Taylor.
149 “Le mot Grec duquel il use, que nous traduisons bon .” — “The Greek word, which he employs, which we translate good.”
judge of the strength of men from the commandments of God; because, as he commands by words,
so he likewise engraves his words on our hearts, and, by communicating strength, causes that his
command shall not be in vain.
Who dwelleth in us150 By this he means, that the assistance of the Holy Spirit is present to
believers, provided that they do not reject it when it is offered to them.
15 Thou knowest that all that are in Asia have forsaken me  Those apostasies which he mentions
might have shaken the hearts of many, and given rise, at the same time, to many suspicions; as we
commonly look at everything in the worst light. Paul meets scandals of this kind with courage and
heroism, that all good men may learn to abhor the treachery of those who had thus deserted the
servant of Christ, when he alone, at the peril of his life, was upholding the common cause; and that
they may not on that account give way, when they learn that Paul is not left destitute of divine
assistance.
Of whom are Phygellus and Hermogenes  He names two of them, who were probably more
celebrated than the rest, that he may shut the door against their slanders; for it is customary with
revolters and deserters from the Christian warfare, 151 in order to excuse their own baseness, to forge
as many accusations as they can against the good and faithful ministers of the gospel. “Phygellus
and Hermogenes,” knowing that their cowardice was justly reckoned infamous by believers, and
that they were even condemned as guilty of base treachery, would not have hesitated to load Paul
with false accusations, and impudently to attack his innocence. Paul, therefore, in order to take
away all credit from their lies, brands them with the mark which they deserve.
Thus also, in the present day, there are many who, because they are not here admitted into the
ministry, or are stripped of the honor on account of their wickedness, 152 or because we do not
choose to support them while they do nothing, or because they have committed theft or fornication,
are compelled to fly, and forthwith wander through France and other countries, and, by throwing
upon us all the accusations 153 that they can, borrow from them an attestation of their innocence.
And some brethren are so silly as to accuse us of cruelty, if any of us paints such persons in their
true colors. But it were to be wished that all of them had their forehead marked with a hot iron, that
they might be recognized at first sight.
16May the Lord grant mercy  From this prayer we infer, that the good offices done to the saints
are not thrown away, even though they cannot recompense them; for, when he prays to God to
150 “Seeing that God hath taken up his abode in us, and wishes that we may be his temples, and dwells in those temples by his
Holy Spirit, are we afraid that he will not give us power to persevere till the end, that he will not keep us in certain possession
of the benefits which we have received from his hand? True, the devil will labor to deprive us of it, but, as our souls will not be
a prey to him, because our Lord Jesus Christ has taken them under his protection, having been committed to him by God the
Father; so nothing that God has appointed for our salvation will be a prey to Satan. And why? Because we have the Spirit to
defend us against all his efforts. And where is that Spirit? We must not go to seek him above the clouds. It is true that he fills
the whole earth, and that his majesty dwells above the heavens; but if we feel that he dwells in us, since he has been pleased to
exercise his power on such poor creatures as we are, let us know that that power will be sufficient for defending us against the
assaults of Satan; that is, provided that we, on our part, are not negligent. For we must not flatter ourselves in our sins, so as to
be careless, but must pray to God, committing everything to him, and hoping that he will always strengthen us more and more.
And because he has begun to make us ministers of his grace, let us know that he will continue, and in such a way that our salvation
and that of our neighbor’s shall always be carried forward more and more to his glory.”- Fr. Ser.
151 “Car c’est la coustume des apostats, et de ceux qui Laissent la vocation de Christ .” — “For it is customary with apostates,
and with those who forsake the calling of Christ.”
152 “Pource qu’on les en depose a cause de leur mesehancete et vie scandaleuse .” — “Because they are deposed on account of
their wickedness and scandalous life.”
153 “Tous les blasphemes et accusations qu’ils peuvent .” — “All the blasphemies and accusations that they can.”
reward them, this carries in it the force of a promise. At the same time, Paul testifies his gratitude,
by desiring that God will grant the remuneration, because he is unable to pay. What if he had
possessed abundant means of remuneration? Undoubtedly he would have manifested that he was
not ungrateful.
To the family of Onesiphorus, for he often refreshed me  It is worthy of attention, that although
he praises the kindness of Onesiphorus alone, yet, on his account, he prays for mercy to the whole
family  Hence we infer, that “the blessing of God rests, not only on the head of the righteous man,”
but on all his house. So great is the love of God toward his people, that it diffuses itself over all
who are connected with them.
And was not ashamed of my chain  This is a proof, not only of his liberality, but likewise of his
zeal; seeing that he cheerfully exposed himself to danger and to the reproach of men, in order to
assist Paul.
18 May the Lord grant to him  Some explain it thus: — “May God grant to him that he may
find mercy with Christ the Judge.” And, indeed, this is somewhat more tolerable than to interpret
that passage in the writings of Moses:
“The Lord rained fire from the Lord,” ( Genesis 19:24 ,)
as meaning, — “The Father rained from the Son.” 154 Yet it is possible that strong feeling may
have prompted Paul, as often happens, to make a superfluous repetition.
That he may find mercy with the Lord on that day155 This prayer shews us how much richer a
recompense awaits those who, without the expectation of an earthly reward, perform kind offices
to the saints, than if they received it immediately from the hand of men. And what does he pray
for? “That he may find mercy;” for he who hath been merciful to his neighbors will receive such
mercy from God to himself. And if this promise does not powerfully animate and encourage us to
the exercise of kindness, we are worse than stupid. Hence it follows, also, that when God rewards
us, it is not on account of our merits or of any excellence that is in us; but that the best and most
valuable reward which he bestows upon us is, when he pardons us, and shews himself to be, not a
stern judge, but a kind and indulgent Father.