---
layout: reading-chapter
book_id: gospel_harmony
book_title: 加尔文福音书注释
author_id: calvin
author_name: 约翰·加尔文
section: "1"
section_title: "MARK 6:12-13； LUKE 9:6"
header-img: psalm-bg-mountain.jpg
date: 2026-04-30 20:15
---

MARK 6:12-13; LUKE 9:6
Luke 9:6 Mark 6:12-13
6. And they departed, and we went round
about through the villages 2 preaching the Gospel,
and healing everywhere.12. And they departed, and preached 1 that
men should repent. 13. And they cast out many
devils, and anointed with oil many diseased
persons, and healed them.
 
Mark 6:12 . And they departed, and preached.  Matthew silently passes over what the Apostles
did. Mark and Luke relate that they proceeded to execute the commission which they had received;
and from their statements it appears more clearly, that the office which Christ at that time bestowed
upon them, as I have formerly mentioned, was temporary, and indeed lasted but a few days. They
tell us that the Apostles went through the cities and villages: and they unquestionably returned in
a short time to their Master, as we shall find to be stated in another passage.
The only matter that requires exposition here is the fact related by Mark, that they anointed
with oil many diseased persons  Christ having conferred on them the power of healing, it is asked,
why did they apply oil? Some learned persons suppose that it was a sort of medicine; and I
acknowledge that in these countries the use of oil was very common. But nothing is more
unreasonable than to imagine, that the Apostles employed ordinary and natural remedies, which
would have the effect of obscuring the miracles of Christ. They were not instructed by our Lord in
the art and science of healing, but, on the contrary, were enjoined to perform miracles which would
arouse all Judea. I think, therefore, that this anointing was a visible token of spiritual grace, by
which the healing that was administered by them was declared to proceed from the secret power
of God; for under the Law oil was employed to represent the grace of the Spirit. The absurdity of
an attempt to imitate the Apostles, by making the anointing of the sick a perpetual ordinance of the
Church, appears from the fact, that Christ bestowed on the Apostles the gift of healing, not as an
inheritance which they should hand down to posterity, but as a temporary seal of the doctrine of
the Gospel. In our own day, the ignorance of the Papists is exceedingly ridiculous in maintaining
that their nasty unction , 3 by which they hurry to the grave persons who are fast dying, is a Sacrament.
2 “Eux donc estans partis alloyent de village en village a l’entour ;” — “they then having set out, went from village to village
round about.”
1 “Eux donc estans partis prescherent ;” — “they then having set out, preached.”
3 The allusion is to extreme unction , (or last anointing ,) which is one of the Seven Sacraments recognized by the Church of
Rome. — Ed.
2John Calvin Commentary on Matthew, Mark, Luke - Volume 2
