---
layout: reading-chapter
book_id: gospel_harmony
book_title: 加尔文福音书注释
author_id: calvin
author_name: 约翰·加尔文
section: "10"
section_title: "MATTHEW 12:9-13 ； MARK 3:1-5 ； LUKE 6:6-10"
header-img: psalm-bg-mountain.jpg
date: 2026-04-30 20:15
---

MATTHEW 12:9-13 ; MARK 3:1-5 ; LUKE 6:6-10
Luke 6:6-10 Mark 3:1-5 Matthew 12:9-13
6. And it happened also on
another Sabbath, that he entered1. And he entered again into
the synagogue, and there was a9. And having departed
thence, he came into their
into the synagogue, and taught; man there having a withered synagogue: 10. And, lo, there
and there was a man there whose hand. 2. And they watched him, was a man having a withered
right hand was withered. 7. And if he would heal that man on the hand, and they asked him,
the scribes and Pharisees Sabbath, that they might accuse saying, Is it lawful to heal on the
watched him, if he would heal him. 3. And he said to the man Sabbaths? that they might accuse
on the Sabbath, that they might having the withered hand, Rise him. 11. But he said to them,
find an opportunity of accusing up in the midst. 4. Whether is it What man shall there be among
him. 8. But he knew their lawful on the Sabbath to do good you who shall have one sleep,
thoughts, and said to the man or to do evil? to save life or to and if it fall on the Sabbath into
that had the withered hand, Rise kill? But they were silent. 5. And a ditch, will not lay hold on it,
up, and stand in the midst. And when he had looked round upon and lift it out? 12. How much
he rose up and stood. 9. Jesus them with indignation, grieving more then is a man better than a
therefore saith to them, I will ask on account of the blindness of sheep? Therefore it is lawful to
you, Whether is it lawful on the their heart, he saith to the man, do well on the Sabbaths.
Sabbaths to do good or to do Stretch out thy hand; and he 13. Then he saith to the man,
evil? to save life or to destroy it? stretched it out, and his hand Stretch out thy hand. And he
10. And when he had looked was restored to soundness like
the other.stretched it out, and it was
restored to soundness like the
other.round about upon them all, he
said to the man, Stretch out thy  
  hand. And he did so: and his
83 “Lesquels convertissent au dommage et a la ruine de l’homme ;”— “who turn to the injury and to the ruin of man.”
84 “La vraye saison et le temps opportun de l’abolissement d’iceluy ;”— “the true season and appropriate time for the abolition
of it.”
30John Calvin Commentary on Matthew, Mark, Luke - Volume 2
hand was restored sound like the
other.
 
Matthew 12:9 .And having departed thence.  This narrative and that which immediately precedes
it have the same object; which is to show, that the scribes watched with a malicious eye for the
purpose of turning into slander every thing that Christ did, and consequently that we need not
wonder if men, whose minds were so depraved, were his implacable enemies. We see also, that it
is usual with hypocrites to pursue what is nothing more than a shadow of the righteousness of the
Law, and as the common saying is, to stickle more about the form than about the substance. First,
then, let us learn from this passage to keep our minds pure, and free from every wicked disposition,
when we are about to form a decision on any question; for if hatred, or pride, or anything of that
description, reign within us, we will not only do injury to men, but will insult God himself, and
turn light into darkness. No man, who was free from malice, would have refused to acknowledge
that it was a Divine work, which those good teachers do not scruple to condemn. 85 Whence comes
such fury, but because all their senses are affected by a wicked hatred of Christ, so that they are
blind amidst the full brightness of the sun? We learn also, that we ought to beware lest, by attaching
undue importance to ceremonial observances, we allow other things to be neglected, which are of
far higher value in the sight of God, and which Christ in another passage calls the more important
matters of the Law, (Matthew 23:23 .) For so strongly are we inclined to outward rites, that we shall
never preserve moderation in this respect, unless we constantly remember, that whatever is enjoined
respecting the worship of God is, in the first place, spiritual; and, secondly, ought to be regulated
by the rule which Christ has laid down to us in this passage.
10.They asked him, saying.  Mark and Luke say only that they watched what our Lord would
do; but Matthew states more clearly that they also attacked him by words. It is probable, that some
others had been previously cured on Sabbath-days; and hence they take occasion to ask if he believes
it to be lawful for him to do again what he had formerly done. They ought to have considered
whether it was a work of God, or of man, to restore a withered hand by a mere touch, or by a single
word. When God appointed the Sabbath, he did not lay down a law for himself, or impose upon
himself any restraint from performing operations on the Sabbath, when he saw it to be proper, in
the same manner as on other days. It was excessive folly, therefore, to call this in question, and
thus to prescribe rules for God himself, and to restrain the freedom of his operations.
11.What man shall there be among you who shall have a sheep?  Christ again points out what
is the true way of keeping the Sabbath; and, at the same time, reproves them for slander, in bringing
as a charge against him what was a universal custom. For if any man’s sheep had fallen into a ditch,
no person would have hindered it from being taken out: but in proportion as a man is of more value
than a sheep,  so much the more are we at liberty to assist him. It is plain, therefore, that if any man
should relieve the necessity of brethren, he did not, in any degree, violate the rest which the Lord
has enjoined. Mark and Luke take no notice of this comparison, but only state that Christ inquired,
Is it lawful on the Sabbath to do good or to do evil?
He who takes away the life of a man is held to be a criminal; and there is little difference between
manslaughter and the conduct of him who does not concern himself about relieving a person in
85 “N’ont point de honte de condamner ;” — “are not ashamed to condemn.”
31John Calvin Commentary on Matthew, Mark, Luke - Volume 2
distress. So then Christ indirectly charges them with endeavoring, under the pretense of a holy act,
to compel him to do evil; for sin is committed, as we have already said, not only by him who does
any thing contrary to the Law, but also by him who neglects his duty. Hence also we perceive, that
Christ did not always employ the same arguments in refuting this slander; for he does not reason
here about his divinity as he does in the case mentioned by John, ( v. 18 .) Nor was there any necessity
for doing so; since the Pharisees were completely refuted by this single defense, that nothing could
be more unreasonable than to pronounce a man, who imitated God, to be a transgressor of the
Sabbath.
Luke 6:8 .But he knew their thoughts  If Matthew states the truth, they had openly declared by
their language what was in their minds; and therefore Christ replies not to their secret thoughts,
but to express words. But both may be true, that they spoke plainly, and yet that Christ discerned
their secret thoughts ; for they did not openly avow their designs, and Matthew himself tells us that
their question was intended to take Christ by surprise; and, consequently, Luke means nothing more
than that Christ was aware of their insidious designs, though not expressed in words.
Mark 3:5 .And when he had looked around upon them with indignation  To convince us that
this was a just and holy anger, Mark explains the reason of it to be, that he was grieved on account
of the blindness of their hearts.  First, then, Christ is grieved, because men who have been instructed
in the Law of God are so grossly blind; but as it was malice that blinded them, his grief is
accompanied by indignation. This is the true moderation of zeal, to be distressed about the destruction
of wicked men, and, at the same time, to be filled with wrath at their ungodliness. Again, as this
passage assures us, that Christ was not free from human passions, we infer from it, that the passions
themselves are not sinful, provided there be no excess. In consequence of the corruption of our
nature, we do not preserve moderation; and our anger, even when it rests on proper grounds, is
never free from sin. With Christ the case was different; for not only did his nature retain its original
purity, but he was a perfect pattern of righteousness. We ought therefore to implore from heaven
the Spirit of God to correct our excesses.
