---
layout: reading-chapter
book_id: gospel_harmony
book_title: 加尔文福音书注释
author_id: calvin
author_name: 约翰·加尔文
section: "11"
section_title: "MATTHEW 12:14-21 ； MARK 3:6-12 ； LUKE 6:11"
header-img: psalm-bg-mountain.jpg
date: 2026-04-30 20:15
---

MATTHEW 12:14-21 ; MARK 3:6-12 ; LUKE 6:11
Luke 6:11 Mark 3:6-12 Matthew 12:14-21
11. And they were filled
with madness, and talked with6. And the Pharisees went
out, and immediately took14. Then the Pharisees went
out, and took counsel against
each other what they should do
to Jesus.counsel with the Herodians
against him, to destroy him.him, how they might destroy
him. 8615. But when Jesus knew
  7. And Jesus withdrew with his this, he withdrew from that
disciples to the sea, and a vast place; and great multitudes
multitude followed him from followed him, and he cured them
Galilee, and from Judea. 8. And all. 16. And he threatened them,
from Jerusalem, and from
86 “Comment ils le mettroyent a mort ;” — “how they should put him to death.”
32John Calvin Commentary on Matthew, Mark, Luke - Volume 2
Idumea, and from beyond
Jordan; and a great multitude (of87 that they should not make him
known: 17. That it might be
men) who dwelt around Tyre fulfilled which was spoken by
and Sidon, who, when they had Isaiah the Prophet, who says,
heard what he was doing, came 18. Lo, my servant, whom I have
to him. 9. And he commanded chosen, my beloved, in whom
his disciples, that a small ship my soul is well pleased: I will
should wait upon him on put my Spirit upon him, and he
account of the multitude, that shall proclaim judgment to the
they might not press upon him. Gentiles. 19. He shall not strive,
10. For he had cured many; so nor cry, nor shall any man hear
that as many as were afflicted his voice in the streets. 20. The
pressed upon him to touch him. bruised reed he will not break,
11. And unclean spirits, when and the smoking flax he will not
they saw him, fell down before quench, till he send forth
him, and cried out, saying, Thou judgment into victory. 21. And
art the Son of God. 12. And he in his name the Gentiles will
trust. vehemently threatened the that
  they should not make him
known
 
Matthew 12:14 .Then the Pharisees took counsel.  How obstinate is the rage which drives the
wicked to oppose God! Even after having been convinced, they pour out their venom more and
more. It is truly monstrous and shocking, that the most distinguished teachers of the Law, who were
entrusted with the government of the Church, are engaged, like robbers, in contriving murder. But
this must happen, whenever the malice of men reaches such a height, that they wish to destroy
every thing that is opposed to their fancy, even though it may be from God.
The circumstance of Christ’s making his escape by flight must not be ascribed to fear; for he
did not become more courageous by the lapse of time, but was endued with the same fortitude of
the Spirit at the time when he fled, as when, at a later period, he voluntarily presented himself to
die. And this was a part of that emptying of himself which Paul mentions, ( Philippians 2:7 ,) that
when he could easily have protected his life by a miracle, he chose rather to submit to our weakness
by taking flight. The only reason why he delayed to die was, that the seasonable time, which had
been appointed by the Father, was not yet come, (John 7:30; 8:20 .) And yet it is manifest, that he
was preserved by heavenly power rather than by flight; for it would not have been difficult for his
enemies to find out the place to which he had retired, and so far was he from shrouding himself in
darkness, that he carried a great company along with him, and rendered that place illustrious by
his miracles. He withdrew from their presence for the sole purpose of not aggravating their rage.
Mark 3:6 .The Pharisees took counsel with the Herodians. Now they regarded the Herodians
with the fiercest hatred; for their eagerness to be considered the guardians and protectors of public
liberty made it necessary for them to make an open profession of mortal hatred to the ministers of
87 ”Et aveques menaces leur defendit ;” — “and with threatenings prohibited them.”
33John Calvin Commentary on Matthew, Mark, Luke - Volume 2
that tyrant. And yet this aversion is counteracted by their hatred and fury against Christ, 88 which
makes them not only enter into a conspiracy with foreigners, but insinuate themselves into the good
graces of those with whom, on other occasions, they would have shrunk from intercourse. While
ungodliness hurries men in various directions, and drives them to different courses, it engages them,
with one consent, in a contest with God. No hostilities prevent them from giving their hand to each
other for opposing the truth of God.
Matthew 12:16 .And he threatened them.  The expression used by M ark conveys, in a still more
pointed manner, that he restrained the unclean spirits,89 who were exclaiming, Thou art the Son
of God.  We have formerly explained the reason why he did not choose to have such witnesses. 90
And yet there is no room to doubt, that divine power extorted from the devils this confession; but
having made it evident that they were subject to his dominion, Christ properly rejected their
testimony. But Matthew goes farther, and states, that Christ discharged them from spreading the
fame of the miracles which he was performing. Not that he wished that fame to be wholly repressed,
(as we have pointed out on other occasions, 91 but to allow it to strike root, that it might bring forth
abundant fruit at the proper season. We know that Christ did not perform miracles for the purpose
of amusement, but had a distinct object in view, which was to prove that he was the Son of God,
and the appointed Redeemer of the world. But he was manifested gradually, and by regular steps,
and was not revealed in his true character
“until the time appointed by the Father,”
(Galatians 4:2 .)
At the same time, it deserves our attention, that when wicked men do their utmost to extinguish
the glory of God, they are so far from gaining their wish, that, on the contrary, God turns their
rebellious designs in an opposite direction. Though Christ withdrew from a populous district, yet
in this very concealment 92 his glory continues to shine, and even bursts forth magnificently into
its full splendor.
17.That it might be fulfilled which was spoken  Matthew does not mean that this prediction was
entirely fulfilled by Christ’s prohibiting loud and general reports to be circulated respecting his
power 93 , but that this was an exhibition of that mildness which Isaiah describes in the person of
the Messiah. Those wonderful works which Christ performed in presence of a few, and which he
did not wish to be announced in pompous terms, were fitted to shake heaven and earth, (Hebrews
12:26 .) It was, therefore, no ordinary proof, how widely he was removed from the pomp and
ostentation of the world.
But it will be proper for us to examine more closely the design of Matthew. By this circumstance
he intended to show, that the glory of Christ’s divinity ought not to be the less admired, because it
appeared under a vail of infirmity. This is unquestionably the very object to which the Holy Spirit
directed the eyes of the prophet. The flesh is constantly longing for outward display, and to guard
88 “Toutesfois la haine enragee qu’ils ont contre Christ, surmonte toutes leurs autres meschantes affections ;” — “and yet the
enraged hatred which they have against Christ rises above all their other wicked dispositions.”
89 “A scavoir qu’il menacoit et faisoit taire les esprits immondes ;”— “namely, that he threatened and silenced the unclean
spirits.”
90 Harmony, volume 1 p. 246 .
91 Harmony, volume 1, pp. 374, 418.
92 “Toutesfois mesmes en ceste cachete, (par maniere de dire ;”)—”yet even in this hiding place, (so to speak.”)
93 “Les miracles et signes qu’il faisoit par sa vertu Divine ;” — “the miracles and signs which he performed by his Divine
power.”
34John Calvin Commentary on Matthew, Mark, Luke - Volume 2
believers against seeking any thing of this description in the Messiah, the Spirit of God declared
that he would be totally different from earthly kings, who, in order to draw admiration upon
themselves, produce great noises wherever they go, and fill cities and towns with commotion. 94
We now perceive how appropriately Matthew applies the prediction of the prophet to the case in
hand. God appointed for his Son a low and mean appearance, and that ignorant persons may not
take offense at an aspect which has no attraction, and is fitted to awaken contempt, both the prophet
and Matthew come forward to declare, that it is not by accident, but in consequence of a decree of
Heaven, that he assumes such a character. 95 Hence it follows, that deep blame attaches to all who
despise Christ, because his outward condition does not correspond to the wishes of the flesh. We
are not at liberty to imagine to ourselves a Christ that corresponds to our fancy, but ought simply
to embrace him as he is offered by the Father. He who is offended by the low condition of Christ,
which God declares to be agreeable to his will, is unworthy of salvation. I now come to examine
the words of the prophet, ( Isaiah 42:1 .)
18.Lo, my servant, whom I have chosen.  To fix our attention more closely on his will, God
points out by the finger, as it were, the person whom he is about to send; and this is the design of
the exclamation, Lo! A similar reason may be assigned for the epithets that follow, when God calls
him his servant, his elect in whom his soul is well pleased.  For whence comes it, that men venture
to measure Christ by their own sense, but because they do not consider that their redemption depends
exclusively on the grace of God? When God offers to us an invaluable treasure, it is excessive and
wicked presumption to regulate our estimation of it by the disdainful views of our flesh. He is called
a servant, not as if he were of the ordinary rank, but by way of eminence, and as the person to
whom God has committed the charge and office of redeeming his Church. As:
no man taketh this honor to himself, but he who is called of God
(Hebrews 5:6 )
is justly entitled to this rank, God declares that he who comes forward in this character was
elected by his decree. 96 Hence it follows, that men are not at liberty to reject him; because, by doing
so, they would be guilty of contempt and rebellion against God. And, indeed, it were the height of
absurdity that our choice or our pride should set aside that calling of God which ought to be regarded
as sacred and inviolable.
My beloved, in whom my soul is well pleased.  There is a still wider import in this statement,
which God next makes by the prophet, that the delight of his soul dwells in Christ; for though the
calling of each of us proceeds from the free favor of God as its only source, yet in Christ there is
this remarkable peculiarity, that in his person God the Father embraces in his love the whole Church.
As we are all by nature enemies of God, his love will never come to us till it first begin with the
Head; which we have seen on a former occasion, and will see again under another passage, ( Matthew
17:5.)
He will proclaim judgment to the Gentiles.  The prophet gives a brief description of Christ’s
office, when he foretells that he will proclaim judgment to the Gentiles  By the word judgment the
94 “Ils font faire de grans bruits: il semble que les villes et citez doyvent tourner ce que dessus dessous, tant y a grande
esmotion ;” — “they cause great noises to be made; and so great is the commotion, that it would seem as if towns and cities were
to be turned upside down.”
95 “Quand Christ vient au monde sans pompe exterieure ;” — “when Christ comes into the world without external pomp.”
96 “Dieu prononce que par son ordonnance il a eleu celuy qu’on verra venir ayant les marques qu’il met la ;” — “God declares
that, by his decree, he hath elected him who will be seen coming, attended by the marks which he there describes.”
35John Calvin Commentary on Matthew, Mark, Luke - Volume 2
Jews understand a government which is correctly and properly arranged, in which order and justice
prevail. The design of the prophet is to inform us, that a person will come who will restore justice
that had fallen, who will be the governor not of one nation only, but will also bring under subjection
to God the Gentiles, among whom dreadful confusion formerly prevailed. And this is the import
of the word bring forth, which the prophet employs; for it was the office of Christ to spread
throughout the whole world the kingdom of God, which was at that time confined to the corner of
Judea; 97 as it is said in another passage,
The Lord will send forth the scepter of thy power out of Zion,
(Psalm 110:2 .)
I will put my Spirit upon him.  This explains the manner in which judgment shall be brought
forth. It is no doubt true, that there never was any portion whatever of righteousness in the world
that did not proceed from the Spirit of God, and that was not maintained by his heavenly power;
as none of the kings of the earth can frame or defend good order, except so far as he shall be assisted
by the same Spirit. But in bringing forth judgment  Christ is greatly superior to all others, for he has
received the Spirit from the Father, that he may pour it out on all his people; for not only does he
by word or writing prescribe what is proper, but inwardly forms the hearts of men, by the grace of
his Spirit, to preserve the rule of righteousness.
19.He will not strive  The general meaning is, that the coming of Christ will not be attended by
noise, will have nothing of royal splendor and magnificence. He presently adds, that this will turn
to the advantage of men, by inducing them to love that mildness which the world everywhere
despises. And certainly it is an astonishing display of the folly of men, that their sentiments with
regard to Christ are less respectful, because he mildly and voluntarily accommodates himself to
their capacity. Were Christ to appear in his glory, what else could be expected, but that it would
altogether swallow us up? What wickedness then is it to be less willing to receive him, when on
our account he descends from his elevation?
That the gentleness of Christ may awaken reverence in believers, Isaiah reminds them how
advantageous, and even how necessary that gentleness must be. Each of us is conscious of his own
weakness; and therefore we ought to consider of what importance it is that Christ should treat us
with kindness. I speak not of unbelievers, who are entirely destitute of all the graces of the Spirit;
but with respect to those whom God has already called, are they not like a half-broken reed  and a
smoking lamp, till God kindle them to full brightness, and supply them with perfect strength? When
Christ is thus pleased to condescend to our weakness, let his unspeakable goodness be embraced
by us with joy. Meanwhile, let none flatter himself in his vices, but let each of us labor to make
greater proficiency, that we may not be tossed about (Ephesians 4:14 ) through our whole life, or
bend, like reeds, to the slightest gale. Let us grow to the stature of perfect men, that we may remain
firm against the diversified attacks of Satan, that our faith may not only emit slight sparks
encompassed by thick smoke, but may send out bright rays.
The example of Christ instructs all his ministers in what manner they ought to conduct
themselves. But as there are some who falsely and absurdly maintain that mildness ought to be
exercised indiscriminately towards all, we must attend to the distinction which the prophet expressly
makes between weak and wicked persons. Those who are too stubborn need to have their hardness
97 “Qui estoit pour lors comme enclos en un anglet au pays de Iudee ;” —”which was then shut up, as it were in a corner, in
the country of Judea.”
36John Calvin Commentary on Matthew, Mark, Luke - Volume 2
beaten violently with a hammer; and those who endeavor to spread darkness in every direction, or
who act as torches to kindle conflagrations, must have their smoke dispelled and their flame
extinguished. While the faithful ministers of the Word ought to endeavor to spare the weak, and
thus to cherish and increase that portion of the grace of God, however small, which they possess,
they must also exercise prudent caution, lest they encourage the obstinate malice of those who have
no resemblance to the smoking lamp or bruised reed.
20.Till he send out judgment into victory.  The words of the prophet are a little different, he will
bring forth the judgment unto truth. But the term employed by Matthew is very emphatic, and is
intended to inform us, that justice is not established in the world without a great struggle and
exertion. The devil throws all possible difficulties in the way, which cannot be removed without
violent opposition. This is confirmed by the word victory, for victory is not obtained in any other
way than by fighting.
21.And in his name shall the Gentiles trust  Instead of these words the prophet has, The isles
shall wait for his law. But though Matthew has changed the words, the meaning is the same, that
the grace of Christ will be shared by the Gentiles.
