---
layout: reading-chapter
book_id: gospel_harmony
book_title: 加尔文福音书注释
author_id: calvin
author_name: 约翰·加尔文
section: "12"
section_title: "LUKE 11:14-15"
header-img: psalm-bg-mountain.jpg
date: 2026-04-30 20:15
---

LUKE 11:14-15
Luke 11:14-15 Mark 3:20-22 Matthew 12:22-24
14. And he was casting out
a devil, and it was dumb. 101 And20. And they come into the
house, and immediately a22. Then was brought to him
one who was tormented by a
when he had cast out the devil, multitude assembled, so that devil, blind and dumb; and he
the dumb person spoke, and the they could not even eat bread. 98 cured him, so that the blind and
multitudes wondered. 10215. And 21. And when those who were dumb person both spoke and
related to him heard it, they went saw. 23. And all the multitudes some of them said, By
out to lay hands on him; 99 for were astonished, and said, Is not Beelzebub, the prince of the
devils, he casteth out devils. 103they said, He is gone mad. 100this the son of David? 24. But
  22. And the Scribes, who had when the Pharisees heard it, they
come down from Jerusalem, said, This man doth not cast out
said, He hath Beelzebub, and by devils but by Beelzebub prince
of the devils. the prince of the devils he
casteth out devils.  
 
101 “Un diable qui estoit muet ;” — “a devil which was dumb.”
98 “Ils ne pouvoyent pas mesme prendre leur repas ;” — “they could not even take their meal.”
102 “Dont les troupes s’emerveillerent ;” — “at which the multitudes wondered.”
99 “Ils sortirent pour le saisir ;” — “they went out to seize him.”
103 “C’est par Beel-zebub, prince des diables, qu’il iette hors les diables ;” — “it is by Beelzebub, prince of the devils, that he
casteth out devils.”
100 “Car ils disoyent qu’il estoit hors du sens ;” — “for they said that he was out of his senses.”
37John Calvin Commentary on Matthew, Mark, Luke - Volume 2
Mark 3:20 .And they come into the house. Mark undoubtedly takes in a somewhat extended
period of time, when he passes from the miracles to that wicked conspiracy which the relatives of
Christ formed with each other, to bind him as if he had been a madman. Matthew and Luke mention
not more than a single miracle, as having given to the Pharisees an opportunity of slander; but as
all the three agree in this last clause which is contained in Mark’s narrative, I have thought it proper
to insert it here.
It is wonderful that such wickedness should have been found among the relatives of Christ,
who ought to have been the first to aid him in advancing the kingdom of God. When they see that
he has already obtained some reputation, their ambition leads them to desire that he should be
admired in Jerusalem; for they exhort him to go up to that city,
that he may show himself more openly, ( John 7:3,4 .)
But now that they perceive him to be hated on one side by the rulers, exposed on another to
numerous slanders, and even despised by the great body of the people--to prevent any injury, or
envy, or dishonor, from arising to the whole family, they form the design of laying hands on him,
and binding him at home, as if he had been a person who labored under mental derangement; and,
as appears from the words of the Evangelist, such was their actual belief.
Hence we learn, first, how great is the blindness of the human mind, in forming such perverse
judgments about the glory of God when openly displayed. Certainly, in all that Christ said and did,
the power of the Holy Spirit shone magnificently; and if others had not clearly perceived it, how
could it be unknown to his relatives, who were intimately acquainted with him? But because Christ’s
manner of acting does not please the world, and is so far from gaining its good graces that it exposes
him to the resentments of many, they give out that he is deranged. Let us learn, in the second place,
that the light of faith does not proceed from flesh and blood, but from heavenly grace, that no man
may glory in any thing else than in the regeneration of the Spirit; as Paul tells us,
If any man wishes to be considered to be in Christ,
let him be a new creature, ( 2 Corinthians 5:17 .)
Matthew 12:22 . Then was brought to him.  Luke explains from the effect, that the devil by
which the man was possessed was dumb; but Matthew says, that a twofold plague had been inflicted
on the man. Many persons, no doubt, are blind and deaf on account of natural defects; but it is
evident, that this man had become blind, and had been deprived of the use of speech, though there
was no defect in his optical nerves, 104 or in the proportion of his tongue. We need not wonder that
so much liberty should be allowed to Satan in injuring the bodily senses, when God justly permits
him to corrupt or pervert all the faculties of the soul.
23.And all the people were astonished.  Hence we infer, that there was a visible display of the
power of God, which drew upon him the admiration of the great body of the people, who were not
at all actuated by any wicked disposition. For how came it that all admired, but because the fact
compelled them to do so? And certainly there is not one of us, who does not see in this narrative,
as in a mirror, an unwonted power of God: and hence it follows, that a diabolical venom must have
seized the minds of the scribes, who were not ashamed to slander so remarkable a work of God.
But we must attend to the result of the miracle. Moved with admiration, those who saw it ask each
other, Is not Jesus the Christ? Acknowledging the power of God, they are led, as it were by the
104 “Aux nerfs appelez Optiques, qui sont les conduits de la veue ;”— “in what are called the Optical nerves, which are the
conductors of vision.”
38John Calvin Commentary on Matthew, Mark, Luke - Volume 2
hand, to faith. Not that they suddenly profited as much as they ought to have done, (for they speak
doubtfully;) but yet it is no small proficiency to be aroused to consider more attentively the glory
of Christ. Some look upon this as a full affirmation, but the words convey no such meaning; and
the fact itself shows, that an unexpected occurrence had struck them forcibly, and that they did not
form a decided opinion, but only that it occurred to them that he might be the Christ.
24.But when the Pharisees heard it.  The scribes cannot withhold the acknowledgment of a fact
so open and manifest, and yet they maliciously carp 105 at what Christ did by Divine power. Not
only do they obscure the praise of the miracle, but endeavor to turn it into a reproach, as if it were
performed by magical enchantment; and that work, which could not be ascribed to a man, is alleged
by them to have the devil for its author. Of the word Beelzebub I have spoken under the Tenth
Chapter, 106 and of the prince of the devils I have said a little under the Ninth Chapter. 107 The opinion
expressed by the scribes, that there is a prince among wicked spirits, did not arise from a mistake
of the common people, or from supposition, but from a conviction entertained among the godly,
that the reprobate have a head, in the same manner as Christ is the Head of the Church.
