---
layout: reading-chapter
book_id: gospel_harmony
book_title: 加尔文福音书注释
author_id: calvin
author_name: 约翰·加尔文
section: "13"
section_title: "LUKE 11:16-23 ； 12:10"
header-img: psalm-bg-mountain.jpg
date: 2026-04-30 20:15
---

LUKE 11:16-23 ; 12:10
Luke 11:16-23 Mark 3:23-30 Matthew 12:25-32
16. And others tempting him
sought from him a sign from23. And having called them
to him, he spoke in parables,25. But as Jesus knew their
thoughts, he said to them, 108
heaven. 17. But as he knew their How can Satan cast out Satan? Every kingdom divided against
thoughts, 114 he said to them, 24. And if a kingdom be divided itself shall be laid waste; and
against itself, that kingdom every city or house divided Every kingdom divided against
cannot stand. 25. And if a house against itself shall not stand. itself is laid waste, and a house
be divided against itself, that 26. And if Satan casteth out against a house falleth. 115
house cannot stand. 26. And if Satan, he is divided against 18. But if Satan also is divided
Satan hath risen up against himself, and how then shall his against himself, how shall his
himself, and is divided, he kingdom stand? 27. And if I, by kingdom stand? for you say that
105 “Ils ne laissent pas toutesfois de ronger, comme par despit et d’un vouloir malicieux ;” — “and yet they do not fail to carp
as with spite, and with a wicked disposition.”
106 Harmony, volume 1. p. 459 .
107 Harmony, volume 1: p. 419 . The reader must have observed that, when our Author has explained a phrase or illustrated a
fact, he seldom repeats what he had said, but refers to the earlier portions of his work, in which the information may be found.
It is not improbable that this may have been his leading motive for adopting the plan of a Harmony, instead of writing a separate
Commentary on each Gospel. He had made some observations on Matthew 9:34 , But the Pharisees said, He casteth out devils
by the prince of the devils; and takes for granted, that the terms which occur in that passage require no farther elucidation. But
it would appear to have escaped his recollection that, on the occasion alluded to, he satisfied himself with general remarks on
the “wicked slander” of the Pharisees, and took no notice of the phrase, prince of the devils. The deficiency is partly supplied
by an explanation which he now makes. -- Ed.
108 “Mais Iesus, cognoissant leurs pensees, leur dit ;” — “but Jesus, knowing their thoughts, said to them.”
114 “Mais luy cognoissant leurs pensees ;” — “but he knowing their thoughts.”
115 “Et ‘toute’ maison ‘divisee’ contre soy-mesme dechet ;”— “and every house divided against itself falleth.”
39John Calvin Commentary on Matthew, Mark, Luke - Volume 2
by Beelzebub I cast out devils.
19. But if I cast out devils bycannot stand, but hath an end. 111
27. No man can enter into thethe assistance of Beelzebub, cast
out devils, by whose assistance
Beelzebub, by whom do your house of a strong man, and do your children cast them out?
children cast them out? therefore pillage his property, unless he therefore they shall judge
they shall be your judges. first bind the strong man, and concerning you. 10928. But if by
20. But if I cast out devils by the then he will pillage his house. the Spirit of God I cast out
finger of God, truly has the 28. Verily I say to you, All sins devils, then the kingdom of God
kingdom of God come to you. shall be forgiven to the sons of has come to you. 29. Otherwise,
21. When a strong man armed men, and blasphemies with how can a man enter into the
keepeth his palace, his property which they shall blaspheme: house of a strong man, and
is at peace; 22. But when a 29. But he who shall speak pillage his property, unless he
stronger than he cometh upon blasphemy against the Holy first bind the strong man, and
him, and overcometh him, he Spirit hath not forgiveness to then he will pillage his house?
taketh from him all his armor, in eternity, 112 but is exposed to 30. He that is not with me is
which he trusted, and divideth eternal judgment. 30. For they against me; and he that gathereth
his spoils. 23. He that is not with said, He hath an unclean spirit.
113not with me scattereth.
31. Therefore I say to you, All me is against me, and he that
gathereth not with me scattereth. sin and blasphemy 110 shall be
Luke 12 :10. forgiven to men; but the
And whosoever speaketh a
word against the Son of man, itblasphemy against the Spirit
shall not be forgiven to men.
shall be forgiven him; but he 32. And whosoever shall speak
who shall blaspheme against the a word against the Son of man,
Holy Spirit, it shall not be
forgiven him.it shall be forgiven him; but he
who shall speak against the Holy
Spirit, it shall not be forgiven
him, neither in the present life
nor in the future.
 
Matthew 12:25 .But as Jesus knew their thoughts.  Though Christ knew sufficiently well, and
had often learned by experience, that the scribes, in the exercise of their malice 116 were in the habit
of putting an unfavorable construction on every thing that he did, yet Matthew and Luke, I have
no doubt, mean that Christ was a discerner of their hearts. 117 And indeed it is probable, that they
spoke so openly against Christ, that their calumnies reached his ears; but Christ knew by his Divine
Spirit the dispositions which led them to slander him. For it frequently happens that erroneous
judgments are formed by men who do not intentionally, after all, oppose what is right, but err
through ignorance; who do not cherish a hidden and concealed venom, but whose rashness carries
111 “Ains il prend fin ;” — “and so he comes to an end.”
109 “Parquoy iceux seront vos iuges ;” — “therefore they shall be your judges.”
112 “N’aura point de remission eternellement ;” — “will have no forgiveness eternally.”
113 “Il a l’esprit immonde ;” — “he hath the unclean spirit.”
110 “Toute sorte de peche et blaspheme ;” — “every description of sin and blasphemy.”
116 “Comme c’estoyent gens tout pleins d’un malin vouloir ;” — “as they were people entirely full of a wicked disposition.
117 “Que Christ a cognu ce qui estoit cache dedans leur coeurs ;” — “that Christ knew what was concealed within their hearts.”
40John Calvin Commentary on Matthew, Mark, Luke - Volume 2
them headlong. 118 The meaning therefore is, that Christ reproved them with the greater severity,
because he was a witness and judge of their inward malice.
Every kingdom divided against itself.  In refuting the calumny alleged against him, he first quotes
a common proverb. This refutation may appear to be not quite satisfactory. We know what subtle
methods Satan sometimes employs, presenting all the while an appearance of discord, in order to
entrap the minds of men by superstitions. Thus, for example, the exorcisms of Popery are nothing
else than feats of dexterity, in which Satan pretends to fight with himself. But no suspicion of this
nature fell on Christ; for he cast out devils in such a manner, as to restore to God the men in whom
they dwelt sound and whole. Whenever Satan enters into a collusion with himself, he pretends to
be vanquished, and yet it is himself that triumphs. But Christ attacked Satan in open combat, threw
him down, and left him nothing remaining. He did not lay him low in one respect, that he might
give him greater stability in another, but stripped him completely of all his armor. Christ therefore
reasons justly, that there is no community of interest between him and Satan, because that father
of cunning 119 keeps one object in view — the preservation of his kingdom.
But perhaps it will be objected, that the devils are often hurried along, by giddiness and blind
madness, to destroy themselves. The answer is easy. The words of Christ mean nothing more than
that it was absurd in the scribes to maintain, that the devil, who endeavors by every method to make
men his slaves, should, of his own accord, destroy the power which he possessed over them. Besides,
it ought to be remembered, that common proverbs were employed by Christ in such a manner, as
to be merely probable conjectures, and not solid arguments; and that, when he speaks of what is
known and well attested, he finds it easier to reach the conscience of his adversaries. 120 Everybody
knew that Christ had driven Satan from his possession, and nothing was plainer than that all his
miracles tended to this object; and hence it was easy to conclude, that his power, which was so
much opposed to Satan, was divine.
27.By whom do your children cast them out? He charges them with passing an unjust and
malicious decision, because in the same case they did not decide in a similar manner, but as they
were affected towards the persons. Now this inequality shows, that their prevailing motive was not
a regard to what is just and right, but blind love or hatred; and that it was even an evidence of
wicked self-love ( φιλαυτίας ) and envy, to condemn in Christ what they praised in their own children
By your children some understand the children of the whole nation; and some think that the Apostles
are so called, because they were acknowledged to be children, while Christ was treated as if he had
been a foreigner.121 Others refer it to the ancient Prophets. I have no doubt that he means the
Exorcists, who were at that time generally employed among the Jews, as is evident from the Acts
of the Apostles, ( 19:19 .) There is reason to believe, that no greater kindness would be exercised in
judging of the disciples of Christ than of their Master; and to apply these words to the dead is a
forced construction, when they manifestly denote a comparison of the present time.
There was indeed no statute of the Law for having Exorcists among the Jews; but we know that
God, in order to maintain their fidelity to his covenant, and their purity of worship, often testified
118 “Mais se laissent trop aisement transporter d’une temerite ne voyans pas le mal qu’ils font ;” — “but allow themselves too
easily to be carried away by rashness, not perceiving the evil that they do.”
119 “Ce pere de toute finesse et malice ;” — “that father of all dexterity and malice.”
120 “Il ne va pas chercher fort loin les choses pour poindre les consciences de ses adversaires ;” — “he does not go far to see
things fitted to affect the consciences of his adversaries.”
121 “Et cependant les scribes tenoyent Christ pour estranger ;” — “and yet the scribes held Christ to be a foreigner.”
41John Calvin Commentary on Matthew, Mark, Luke - Volume 2
his presence among them by a variety of miracles. It is even possible that there were persons who
cast out devils by calling on the name of the Lord; and the people, having experienced such a display
of the power of God, rashly concluded that it was an ordinary office. 122 The Papists afterwards,
resolving not to occupy a lower rank, imitated them by creating Exorcists; and in this way were
apes of apes. Besides, it was not necessary that Christ should approve of those exorcisms, in order
to point out the malice of those who wished to have them regarded as sacred, and as authorized by
the name of God; for the objection was, as we say, of a personal nature. 123
Therefore they shall judge concerning you.  These words are not to be taken literally, but the
meaning is: “We need not go far to seek your condemnation. You attribute to Beelzebub the miracles
which I have performed, and you praise the same things in your own children. You have at home
what is sufficient to condemn you.” But if any one prefer to understand them differently, as
reproaching them with the grace of God, which was sometimes exhibited through the Exorcists, I
do not greatly object to that view. Though they were greatly degenerated, yet the Lord was pleased
not to leave them altogether without evidences of his power, that there might be some testimony
to authorize the priesthood in general, and the service of the temple; for it was of the highest
importance that there should be evident marks to distinguish them from the superstitions of the
Gentiles. I look upon the former view, however, as the natural one.
28.But if I cast out devils by the Spirit of God.  Luke says,  if I cast out devils by The Finger of
God; employing the word Finger  metaphorically instead of the Spirit. As God works, and exerts
his power, by his Spirit, it is with propriety that the word Finger  is applied to him. And this mode
of expression was common among the Jews, as Moses relates that Pharaoh’s magicians said, This
is the finger of God  Now Christ infers from what he has already stated, that the scribes prove
themselves to be ungrateful to God, by being unwilling that He should reign among them. Hitherto,
he replied to their idle calumny; but now, he treats them as convicted persons, and charges them
not to make ungodly opposition to the kingdom of God. He does not confine himself to a single
miracle, but takes occasion from it to discourse on the object of his coming, reminds them that they
ought not merely to look at one remarkable fact, but at a far more important truth, that it was the
will of God, by revealing His Messiah, to raise up their salvation which was fallen, and to restore
his kingdom among them. Thus we see that Christ complains of their ingratitude, in madly rejecting
from the midst of them the inestimable grace of God. The kingdom of God hath come to you  The
word come is emphatic, and implies that, without any request from them, God appears as their
Redeemer, while they do everything that is in their power to drive him away, and, when he is present
and prepared for their salvation, refuse to give him a place.
29.How can any one enter into the house of a strong man?  Though the Evangelists differ a
little as to words, there is a perfect agreement among them as to the substance of this discourse.
Christ is pursuing the subject, on which he had lately touched, about the kingdom of God, and
declares it to be necessary that Satan be violently driven out, in order that God may establish his
kingdom among men. What he now states is nothing else than a confirmation of the preceding
122 “Le peuple en a fait un office ordinaire sans regarder comment ;”— “the people made it to be an ordinary office, without
considering in what manner.”
123 “Car l’objection s’addresse a la personne, comme on dit, et non pas a la chose: c’est a dire, Christ ne regarde point ce qu’a
la verite il falloit dire de ces Exorcistes, mais ce qu’en pensoyent les scribes ;” — “for the objection is addressed to the person,
as we say, and not to the thing: that is to say, Christ does not consider what in truth ought to be said of these Exorcists, but what
the Jews thought of them.”
42John Calvin Commentary on Matthew, Mark, Luke - Volume 2
statement. But to ascertain more fully the intention of Christ, we must call to our recollection that
analogy which Matthew (8:17) traces between the visible and the spiritual layouts which Christ
bestows. 124 Every benefit which the bodies of men received from Christ was intended to have a
reference to their souls. Thus, in rescuing the bodily senses of men from the tyranny of the devil,
he proclaimed that the Father had sent him as a Deliverer, to destroy his spiritual tyranny over their
souls.
I now return to his words. He maintains that a strong  and powerful tyrant cannot be deprived
of his dominion, till he is stripped of his armor;  for if he is not met by a force superior to his own,
he will never yield of his own accord. Why is this asserted? First, we know that the devil is
everywhere called the prince of the world  Now the tyranny which he exercises is defended on every
side by strong ramparts. His snares for entrapping men are beyond all calculation; nay, men are
already his slaves, and so firmly bound by a variety of fetters, that they rather cherish the slavery,
to which they are devoted, than make any aspirations after freedom. There are also innumerable
evils which he inflicts upon them, by which he holds them in wretched oppression under his feet.
In short, there is nothing to prevent him from tyrannizing over the world without control. Not that
he can do anything without the permission of the Creator, but because Adam, having withdrawn
from the dominion of God, has subjected all his posterity to this foreign sway.
Now though it is contrary to nature that the devil reigns, and though it is by, just punishment
of God, on account of sin, that men are subjected to his tyranny, yet he remains in quiet possession
of his kingdom, and may insult us at his pleasure, till a stronger than he shall rise up against him.
But this stronger person is not to be found on earth, for men have not sufficient power to relieve
themselves; and therefor it was promised that a Redeemer would come from heaven. Now this kind
of redemption Christ shows to be necessary, in order to wrench from the devil, by main force, what
he will never quit till he is compelled. By these words he informs us, that it is in vain for men to
expect deliverance, till Satan has been subdued by a violent struggle. 125
He expressly accuses the scribes of ignorance, in not understanding the principles of the kingdom
of God. But this reproof applies almost equally to all, for all are chargeable with the same folly.
There is no man who does not loudly boast that he desires the kingdom of God; and yet we do not
permit Christ to fight boldly, as the occasion requires, in order to rescue us from the power of our
tyrant; just as if a sick man were to entreat the aid of a physician, and then to refuse every remedy.
We now see the reason why Christ introduced this parable. It was to show, that the scribes were
hostile to the kingdom of God, the beginnings of which they maliciously resisted. Let us also learn
that, as we are all subject to the tyranny of Satan, there is no other way in which he commences
his reign within us, than when he rescues us, by the powerful and victorious arm of Christ, from
that wretched and accursed bondage.
30.He that is not with me.  There are two ways of explaining this passage. Some suppose that
it is an argument drawn from contraries, and that Christ’s meaning is: “I cannot reign till the devil
is overthrown; for the object of all his attempts is, to scatter whatever I gather.” And certainly we
see abundant evidence of the earnestness with which that enemy labors to destroy the kingdom of
Christ. But I rather agree in opinion with those who explain it to denote, that the scribes are declared
124 Harmony, volume 1 p. 251.
125 “Que c’est folie aux hommes d’attendre deliverance, si Satan n’est premierement mis bas en choquant a bon escient contre
luy;” — “that it is folly in men to expect deliverance, if Satan is not first put down by encountering him in good earnest.”
43John Calvin Commentary on Matthew, Mark, Luke - Volume 2
to be, in two respects, opposed to the kingdom of God, because they intentionally hinder its progress.
“It was your duty to assist me, and to give me your hand in establishing the kingdom of God; for
whoever does not assist is, in some measure, opposed to me, or, at least, deserves to be reckoned
among enemies. What then shall be said of you, whose furious rage drives you into avowed
opposition? ”126
And he that gathereth not with me scattereth  The truth of this is abundantly manifest from what
has been already said; for so strong is our propensity to evil, that the justice of God can have no
place but in those who apply to it in good earnest. This doctrine has a still more extensive bearing,
and implies that they are unworthy to be considered as belonging to the flock of Christ, who do not
apply to it all the means that are in their power; because their indolence tends to retard and ruin the
kingdom of God, which all of us are called to advance.
31.Therefore I say to you.  This inference ought not to be confined to the clause immediately
preceding, but depends on the whole discourse. Having proved that the scribes could not blame
him for casting out devils, without opposing the kingdom of God, he at length concludes that it is
no light or ordinary offense, but an atrocious crime, knowingly and willingly to pour contempt on
the Spirit of God. We have already said, that Christ did not pronounce this decision on the mere
words which they uttered, but on their base and wicked thought.
All sin and blasphemy.  As our Lord declares blasphemy against the Holy Ghost to be more
heinous than all other sins, it is of importance to inquire what is the meaning of that term. Those
who define it to be impenitence127 may be refuted without any difficulty; for it would have been
in vain and to no purpose for Christ to say, that it is not forgiven in the present life.  Besides, the
word blasphemy cannot be extended indiscriminately to every sort of crimes; but from the comparison
which Christ makes, we shall easily obtain the true definition. Why is it said that he who blasphemes
against the Spirit  is a more heinous sinner than he who blasphemes against Christ? Is it because
the majesty of the Spirit is greater, that a crime committed against him must be punished with
greater severity? Certainly that is not the reason; for as the fullness of the Godhead (Colossians
2:9) shines in Christ, he who pours contempt upon him overturns and destroys, as far as it lies in
his power, the whole glory of God. Now in what manner shall Christ be separated from his Spirit,
so that those who treat the Spirit with contempt offer no injury or insult to Christ?
Already we begin to perceive, that the reason why blasphemy against the Spirit  exceeds other
sins, is not that the Spirit is higher than Christ, but that those who rebel, after that the power of God
has been revealed, cannot be excused on the plea of ignorance. Besides, it must be observed, that
what is here said about blasphemy does not refer merely to the essence of the Spirit, but to the grace
which He has bestowed upon us. Those who are destitute of the light of the Spirit, however much
they may detract from the glory of the Spirit, will not be held guilty of this crime. 128 We do not
maintain, that those persons are said to pour contempt on the Spirit of God, who oppose his grace
and power by hardened malice; and farther we maintain, that this kind of sacrilege is committed
only when we knowingly endeavor to extinguish the Spirit who dwells in us.
126 “A batailler ouvertement contre Dieu ;” — “to fight openly against God.”
127 “Quant a ceux qui disent que c’est un endurcissement jusqu’a la mort ;” — “as to those who say that it is hardened obstinacy
even to death.”
128 “Ne seront pas toutesfois tenus coulpables de ce grand crime duquel il est ici parle ;” — “will not, on that account, be held
guilty of the great crime here spoken of.”
44John Calvin Commentary on Matthew, Mark, Luke - Volume 2
The reason why contempt is said to be poured on the Spirit, rather than on the Son or the Father,
is this. By detracting from the grace and power of God, we make a direct attack on the Spirit, from
whom they proceed, and in whom they are revealed to us. Shall any unbeliever curse God? It is as
if a blind man were dashing against a wall. But no man curses the Spirit who is not enlightened by
him, and conscious of ungodly rebellion against him; for it is not a superfluous distinction. that all
other blasphemies shall be forgiven, except that one blasphemy which is directed against the Spirit.
If a man shall simply blaspheme against God, he is not declared to be beyond the hope of pardon;
but of those who have offered outrage to the Spirit, it is said that God will never forgive them. Why
is this, but because those only are blasphemers against the Spirit, who slander his gifts and power,
contrary to the conviction of their own mind? Such also is the import of the reason assigned by
Mark for the extreme severity of Christ’s threatening against the Pharisees; because they had said
that he had the unclean spirit; for in this manner they purposely and maliciously turned light into
darkness; and, indeed, it is in the manner of the giants,129 as the phrase is, to make war against
God.
But here a question arises. Do men proceed to such a pitch of madness as not to hesitate,
knowingly and willfully, to rush against God? for this appears to be monstrous and incredible. I
reply: Such audacity does indeed proceed from mad blindness, in which, at the same time, malice
and virulent rage predominate. Nor is it without reason that Paul says, that though he was
a blasphemer, he obtained pardon, because he had done it ignorantly in his unbelief,
(1 Timothy 1:13 ;)
for this term draws a distinction between his sin and voluntary rebellion. This passage refutes
also the error of those who imagine that every sin which is voluntary, or which is committed in
opposition to the conscience, is unpardonable. On the contrary, Paul expressly limits that sin to the
First Table of the Law; 130 and our Lord not less plainly applies the word blasphemy to a single
description of sin, and at the same time shows, that it is of a kind which is directly opposed to the
glory of God. 131
From all that has been said, we may conclude that those persons sin and blaspheme against the
Holy Spirit, who maliciously turn to his dishonor the perfections of God, which have been revealed
to him by the Spirit, in which His glory ought to be celebrated, and who, with Satan, their leader,
are avowed enemies of the glory of God. We need not then wonder, if for such sacrilege there is
no hope of pardon; for they must be desperate who turn the only medicine of salvation into a deadly
venom. Some consider this to be too harsh, and betake themselves to the childish expedient, that
it is said to be unpardonable, because the pardon of it is rare and difficult to be obtained. But the
words of Christ are too precise to admit of so silly an evasion. It is excessively foolish to argue that
God will be cruel if he never pardon a sin, the atrocity of which ought to excite in us astonishment
and horror. 132 Those who reason in that manner do not sufficiently consider what a monstrous crime
129 “Et cela c’est desfier Dieu, et luy faire la guerre, comme les Geans des Poetes, ainsique porte le proverbe Latin ;” — “and
that is to defy God, and make war with him, like the Giants of the Poets, as the Latin proverb bears.”
130 “Restreint nommement a la Premiere Table de la Loy ce peche contre l’Esprit ;” — “expressly limits to the First Table of
the Law this sin against the Spirit.”
131 “Que c’est un peche qui battaille directement contre la gloire de Dieu ;” — “that it is a sin which fights directly against the
glory of God.”
132 “Veu que l’horreur d’iceluy nous devroit a tous faire dresser les cheveux en la teste ;” — “since the horror at it ought to
have such an effect on all of us, as to make the hair stand on our head.”
45John Calvin Commentary on Matthew, Mark, Luke - Volume 2
it is, not only to profane intentionally the sacred name of God, but to spit in his face when he shines
evidently before us. It shows equal ignorance to object, that it would be absurd if even repentance
could not obtain pardon; for blasphemy against the Spirit is a token of reprobation, and hence it
follows, that whoever have fallen into it, have been delivered over to a reprobate mind, (Romans
1:28.) As we maintain, that he who has been truly regenerated by the Spirit cannot possibly fall
into so horrid a crime, so, on the other hand, we must believe that those who have fallen into it
never rise again; nay, that in this manner God punishes contempt of his grace, by hardening the
hearts of the reprobate, so that they never have any desire towards repentance.
32. Neither in the present life  What these words mean, Mark briefly explains by saying, that
those who have spoken against the Spirit are exposed to eternal judgment  Every day we ask from
God the forgiveness of sins, and every day he reconciles us to Him; and, finally, at death, he takes
away all our sins, and declares that he is gracious to us. The fruit of this mercy will appear at the
last day. The meaning therefore is: — “There is no reason to expect that those who shall have
blasphemed against the Spirit will obtain pardon in this life, or will be acquitted in the last judgment.”
With regard to the inference drawn by the Papists, that the sins of men are forgiven after death,
there is no difficulty in refuting their slander. First, they act foolishly in torturing the expression,
future life, to mean an intermediate period, while any one may perceive that it denotes “the last
judgment.” But it is likewise a proof of their dishonesty; for the objection which they sophistically
urge is inconsistent with their own doctrine. Who knows not their distinction, that sins are freely
pardoned in respect of guilt, but that punishment and satisfaction are demanded? This is an
acknowledgment, that there is no hope of salvation to any one whose guilt is not pardoned before
death. To the dead, therefore, there remains no forgiveness, except as regards punishment; and
surely they will not venture to deny that the subject of this discourse is guilt. Let them now go and
light their fire of purgatory with these cold materials, if ice can kindle a flame. 133
