---
layout: reading-chapter
book_id: gospel_harmony
book_title: 加尔文福音书注释
author_id: calvin
author_name: 约翰·加尔文
section: "20"
section_title: "MATTHEW 13:18-23； MARK 4:13-20 ； LUKE 8:11-15"
header-img: psalm-bg-mountain.jpg
date: 2026-04-30 20:15
---

MATTHEW 13:18-23; MARK 4:13-20 ; LUKE 8:11-15
Luke 8:11-15 Mark 4:13-20 Matthew 13:18-23
11. Now the parable is this:
The seed is the word of God.13. And he said to them,
Know you not this parable? and18. Hear therefore the
parable of the sower. 19. When
12. And they that (received the how shall you know all any one heareth the word of the
seed) near the road are those parables? 14. The sower is he kingdom, and understandeth not,
who hear: afterwards cometh the that soweth the word. 15. And that wicked one cometh, and
devil, and taketh the word out of there are some that (receive the taketh away what was sown in
their heart, that they may not seed) near the road, in whom the the heart. This is he who
believe and be saved. 13. For word is sown; and when they received seed near the road.
they that are on the rock are have heard, immediately Satan 20. But he that received the seed
those who, when they have cometh, and taketh away the thrown into stony places, is he
heard, receive the word with joy: word which was sown in their that heareth the word, and
but these have not roots, who for hearts. 16. And in like manner immediately receiveth it with
a time believe, and in the time there are others who receive the joy: 21. But hath not root in
of temptation fall away. 14. And seed into stony places, who, himself, but is of short duration:
what fell among thorns are those when they have heard the word, when affliction or persecution
who have heard, and, going immediately receive it with joy; ariseth on account of the word,
away, are choked by the 17. And have not root in immediately he is offended.
anxieties, and riches, and themselves, but are of short 22. And he that received the
pleasures of life, and do not duration: afterwards, when seed among thorns is he that
yield fruit. 15. And what fell into affliction or persecution ariseth heareth the word, and the care
a good soil are those who, with on account of the words, of this life, and the deceitfulness
191 “Simeon disoit selon l’affection de tours les Peres ;” — “Simeon spoke according to the feeling of all the Fathers.”
192 “Et de faict, il ne se pouvoit faire que ces bons personnages ne fussent tous ravis, et comme enflambez d’un grand desir de
la delivrance promise .” — “And indeed it was impossible that those good men should not be altogether transported, and as it
were inflamed with a great desire of the promised deliverance.”
67John Calvin Commentary on Matthew, Mark, Luke - Volume 2
of riches, choke the word, and it
becometh unfruitful. 23. But hea good and upright heart, keep
it, and yield fruit with patience.immediately they are offended.
18. And there are others who
who receiveth seed into a good   receive the seed among thorns:
soil is he that heareth the word these are they that hear the word,
and understandeth it, and who 19. And the anxieties of this life,
afterwards yieldeth andand the deceitfulness of riches,
produceth fruit, 193 some a and the desires of other things,
entering in, choke the word, and hundred-fold, some sixty-fold,
and some thirty-fold. it is rendered unfruitful.
  20. There are others who have
received the seed into a good
soil, who hear the word, and
receive it, and bear fruit, some
thirty, some sixty, some a
hundred.
 
According to Matthew and Luke, Christ explains the parable to his disciples simply, and
unaccompanied by a reproof; but according to Mark, he indirectly blames them for being slow of
apprehension, because those who were to be the teachers of all did not run before others. 194 The
general truth conveyed is, that the doctrine of the Gospel, when it is scattered like seed, 195 is not
everywhere fruitful; because it does not always meet with a fertile and well cultivated soil. He
enumerates four kinds of hearers: the first of which do not receive the seed; 196 the second appear,
indeed, to receive it, 197 but in such a manner that it does not take deep root; in the third, the corn
is choked; 198 and so there remains a fourth part, which produces fruit. Not that one hearer only out
of four, or ten out of forty, embrace the doctrine, and yield fruit; for Christ did not intend here to
fix down an exact number, or to arrange the persons, of whom he speaks, in equal divisions; and,
indeed, where the word is sown, the produce of faith is not always alike, but is sometimes more
abundant, and at other times more scanty. He only intended to warn us, that, in many persons, the
seed of life is lost on account of various defects, in consequence of which it is either destroyed
immediately, or it withers, or it gradually degenerates. That we may derive the greater advantage
from this warning, we ought to bear in mind, that he makes no mention of despisers who openly
reject the word of God, but describes those only in whom there is some appearance of docility. But
if the greater part of such men perish, what shall become of the rest of the world, by whom the
doctrine of salvation is openly rejected? I now come down to each class.
193 “Celuy qui oit la Parole, et l’entend, a scavoir celuy qui porte et produit fruict ;” — “he who heareth the word, and
understandeth it, that is he who beareth and produceth fruit.”
194 “Ne passent autrement les autres pour leur monstrer le chemin ;”— “did not go beyond others to show them the road.”
195 “Estant espandue ca et la comme le b1e qu’on iette en terre ;”— “being scattered here and there, like the corn which is
thrown into the earth.”
196 “Desquels les premiers ne retienent pas la semence en leurs coeurs pour germer ;” — “the first of which do not retain the
seed in their hearts so as to spring up.”
197 “Les seconds semblent bien l’avoir gardee iusques a venir a germer ;” — “the second appear to have kept it till it came to
spring up.”
198 “Aux troisiemes, le ble estant en herbe est estouffe ;” — “in the third, the corn, while yet in the blade, is choked.”
68John Calvin Commentary on Matthew, Mark, Luke - Volume 2
Matthew 13:19 . When any one heareth the word of the kingdom, and understandeth it not.  He
mentions, in the first place, the barren and uncultivated, who do not receive the seed within, because
there is no preparation in their hearts. Such persons he compares to a stiff and dry soil, like what
we find on a public road, which is trodden down, and becomes hard, like a pavement. I wish that
we had not occasion to see so many of this class at the present day, who come forward to hear, but
remain in a state of amazement, and acquire no relish for the word, and in the end differ little from
blocks or stones. Need we wonder that they utterly vanish away?
That which was sown in their heart.  This expression, which Christ employs, is not strictly
accurate, and yet it is not without meaning; for the wickedness and depravity of men do not make
the word to lose its own nature, or to cease to have the character of seed. This must be carefully
observed, that we may not suppose the favors of God to cease to be what they are, though the good
effect of them does not reach us. With respect to God, the word is sown in the hearts, but it is far
from being true, that the hearts of all receive with meekness what is planted in them, as James ( 1:21)
exhorts us to receive the word. So then the Gospel is always a fruitful seed as to its power, but not
as to its produce. 199
Luke adds, that the devil200 taketh away the seed out of their heart, that they may not believe
and be saved  Hence we infer that, as hungry birds are wont to do at the time of sowing, this enemy
of our salvation, as soon as the doctrine is delivered, watches and rushes forth to seize it, before it
acquires moisture and springs up. It is no ordinary praise of the word, when it is pronounced to be
the cause of our salvation.
20. But he that received the seed thrown into stony places.  This class differs from the former;
for temporary faith, being a sort of vegetation of the seed, 201 promises at first some fruit; but their
hearts are not so properly and thoroughly subdued, as to have the softness necessary for their
continued nourishment. 202 We see too many of this class in our own day, who eagerly embrace the
Gospel, and shortly afterwards fall off; for they have not the lively affection that is necessary to
give them firmness and perseverance. Let every one then examine himself thoroughly, that the
alacrity which gives out a bright flame may not quickly go out, as the saying is, like a fire of tow;
203 for if the word does not fully penetrate the whole heart, and strike its roots deep, faith will want
the supply of moisture that is necessary for perseverance. Great commendation is due, no doubt,
to that promptitude, which receives the word of God with joy, and without delay, as soon as it is
published; but let us learn, that nothing has been done, till faith acquires true firmness, that it may
not wither in the first blade.
21. When affliction or persecution ariseth on account of the word.  By way of example, Christ
says that such persons are made uneasy by the offense of the cross. And certainly, as the heat of
the sun discovers the barrenness of the soil, so persecution and the cross lay open the vanity of
those, who are slightly influenced by I know not what desire, but are not actually moved by earnest
199 “Mais non pas a ce qui s’accomplit es hommes ;” — “but not as to what is accomplished in men.”
200 “Le mauvais ;” — “the wicked one.”
201 “La foy temporelle, qui est comme le germe de la semence ;”— “temporary faith, which is as it were the germ of the seed.”
202 “Mais les coeurs ne sont point tellement cultivez et preparez, qu’ils ayant une douceur pour nourrir et entretenir ce qui est
commence ;” — “but the hearts are not so cultivated and prepared, as to have a softness for nourishing and supporting what is
begun.”
203 “De peur que ceste ardeur et alaigrete qui est de grand monstre pour le commencement, ne s’en aille bien tost en fumee
comme un feu d’estouppes, ainsi que porte le proverbe commun ;” — “lest that ardor and alacrity, which makes a great show at
the beginning, may soon vanish into smoke, like a fire of tow, as the common proverb goes.”
69John Calvin Commentary on Matthew, Mark, Luke - Volume 2
feelings of piety. Such persons, according to Matthew and Mark, are temporary,204 not only because,
having professed, for a time, that they are the disciples of Christ, they afterwards fall away through
temptation, but because they imagine that they have true faith. According to Luke, Christ says that
they believe for a time; because that honor which they render to the Gospel resembles faith. 205 At
the same time we ought to learn, that they are not truly regenerated by the incorruptible seed, which
never fadeth, as Peter tells us, ( 1 Peter 1:4 ;) for he says that these words of Isaiah, The word of God
endureth for ever, (Isaiah 40:8 ; 1 Peter 1:25 ,) are fulfilled in the hearts of believers, in whom the
truth of God, once fixed, never passes away, but retains its vigor to the end. Still, those persons
who take delight in the word of God, and cherish some reverence for it, do in some manner believe;
for they are widely different from unbelievers, who give no credit to God when he speaks, or who
reject his word. In a word, let us learn that none are partakers of true faith, except those who are
scaled with the Spirit of adoption, and who sincerely call on God as their Father; and as that Spirit
is never extinguished, so it is impossible that the faith, which he has once engraven on the hearts
of the godly, shall pass away or be destroyed.
22. And he who received the seed among thorns.  He places in the third class, those who would
have been disposed to receive the seed within, if they had not permitted other things  to corrupt and
render it degenerate. Christ compares to thorns  the pleasures of this life, or wicked desires, and
covetousness, and the other anxieties of the flesh. Matthew mentions only the care of this life, along
with covetousness, but the meaning is the same; for under that term he includes the allurements of
pleasures, which Luke mentions, and every kind of desire. As corn, which otherwise might have
been productive, no sooner rises into the stalk than it is choked by thorns and other matters injurious
to its growth; so the sinful affections of the flesh prevail over the hearts of men, and overcome
faith, and thus destroy the force of the heavenly doctrine, before it has reached maturity.
Now though sinful desires exert their power on the hearts of men, before the word of the Lord
springs up into the blade, yet, at first, their influence is not perceived, and it is only when the corn
has grown up, and given promise of fruit, that they gradually make their appearance. Each of us
ought to endeavor to tear the thorns out of his heart, if we do not choose that the word of God
should be choked; for there is not one of us whose heart is not filled with a vast quantity, and, as I
may say, a thick forest, of thorns. And, indeed, we perceive how few there are that reach maturity;
for there is scarcely one individual out of ten that labors, I do not say to root out, but even to cut
down the thorns. Nay more, the very number of the thorns, which is so prodigious that it ought to
shake off our sloth, is the reason why most people give themselves no trouble about them.
The deceitfulness of riches.  Christ employs this phrase to denote covetousness  He expressly
says, that riches are imposing or deceitful, in order that men may be more desirous to guard against
falling into their snares. Let us remember that the affections of our flesh, the number and variety
of which are incalculable, are so many injurious influences to corrupt the seed  of life.
23. But he that received the seed into a good soil. None are compared by Christ to a good and
fertile soil,  but those in whom the word of God not only strikes its roots deep and solid, but
overcomes every obstacle that would prevent it from yielding fruit. Is it objected that it is impossible
to find any one who is pure and free from thorns? It is easy to reply, that Christ does not now speak
of the perfection of faith, but only points out those in whom the word of God yields fruit. Though
204 “Temporels, c’est a dire, de petite duree ;” — “temporary, that is to say, of short duration.”
205 “Ressemble aucunement a la foy ;” — “somewhat resembles faith.”
70John Calvin Commentary on Matthew, Mark, Luke - Volume 2
the produce may not be great, yet every one who does not fall off from the sincere worship of God
is reckoned a good and fertile soil  We ought to labor, no doubt, to pull out the thorns; but as our
utmost exertion will never succeed so well, but that there will always be some remaining behind,
let each of us endeavor, at least, to deaden them, that they may not hinder the fruit of the word.
This statement is confirmed by what immediately follows, when Christ informs us that all do not
yield fruit in an equal degree.
Some a hundred-fold, and some sixty-fold, and some thirty-fold.  Though the fertility of that
soil, which yields a thirty-fold  produce, is small, compared with that which yields a hundred-fold,
yet we perceive that our Lord classes together all kinds of soil which do not entirely disappoint the
labors and expectation of the husbandman. 206 Hence too we learn, that we have no right to despise
those who occupy a lower degree of excellence; for the master of the house himself, though he
gives to one the preference above another on account of more abundant produce, yet bestows the
general designation, good, even on inferior soils. Those three gradations are absurdly tortured by
Jerome, to denote virgins, widows, and married persons; as if that produce which the Lord demands
from us belonged to celibacy alone, and as if the piety of married persons did not, in many cases,
yield more abundantly every fruit of virtue. It must also be observed, in passing, that what Christ
says about a hundred-fold produce is not hyperbolical; for such was at that time the fertility of some
countries, as we learn from many historians, who give their report as eye-witnesses.
