---
layout: reading-chapter
book_id: gospel_harmony
book_title: 加尔文福音书注释
author_id: calvin
author_name: 约翰·加尔文
section: "24"
section_title: "LUKE 7:36-50"
header-img: psalm-bg-mountain.jpg
date: 2026-04-30 20:15
---

LUKE 7:36-50
Luke 7:36-50
36. And one of the Pharisees requested him to take food with him; and he entered into the
house of the Pharisee, and sat down at table. 37. And, lo, a woman in the city, who was a sinner,
when she knew that he sat at table in the house of the Pharisee, brought an alabaster box of ointment:
23638. And sitting at his feet behind him, and weeping, she began to wash his feet with tears, and
wiped them with the hairs of her head, and kissed his feet, and anointed them with ointment. 237
39. And the Pharisee, who had invited him, seeing it, said, speaking within himself, If this man
were a Prophet, he would certainly know who and what sort of woman this is that toucheth him;
for she is a sinner. 23840. And Jesus answering, said to him, Simon, I have something to say to
thee. And he said, Master, say on. 41. A certain creditor had two debtors: one owed five hundred
pence, and another fifty. 42. And when they had nothing to pay, he forgave them both. Tell me
then, which of them will love him more? 43. Simon answering said, I suppose that it will be he to
whom he forgave more. And he said to him, Thou hast decided aright. 44. And turning to the
woman, he said to Simon, Seest thou this woman? I entered into thy house, thou gavest not water
for my feet; but she hath moistened my feet with tears, and wiped them with the hairs of her head.
45. Thou gavest me not a kiss; but she, since the time that I entered, hath not ceased to kiss my
feet. 47. For which reason I say to thee, Her many sins are forgiven, for she hath loved much; but
he to whom less is forgiven loveth less. 48. And he said to her, Thy sins are forgiven thee. 49. And
those who sat at table with him began to say within themselves, Who is this that even forgiveth
sins? 50. And he said to the woman, Thy faith hath saved thee; go in peace.
 
 
36.And one of the Pharisees requested him.  This narrative shows the captious disposition, not
only to take, but to seek out, offenses, which was manifested by those who did not know the office
of Christ. A Pharisee  invites Christ; from which we infer, that he was not one of those who furiously
and violently opposed, nor of those who haughtily despised his doctrine. But whatever might be
his mildness, he is presently offended when he sees Christ bestow a gracious reception on a woman
who, in his opinion, ought not to have been permitted to approach or to converse with him; and,
accordingly, disowns him as a prophet, because he does not acknowledge him to be the Mediator,
whose peculiar office it was to bring miserable sinners into a state of reconciliation with God. It
was something, no doubt, to bestow on Christ the honor due to a prophet; but he ought also to have
inquired for what purpose he was sent, what he brought, and what commission he had received
from the Father. Overlooking the grace of reconciliation, which was the main feature to be looked
for in Christ, the Pharisee concluded that he was not a prophet  And, certainly, had it not been that
through the grace of Christ this woman had obtained the forgiveness of her sins, and a new
righteousness, she ought to have been rejected.
236 “Or voyci il y avoit une femme de la ville qui avoit este de mauvaise vie, laquelle ayant cognu qu’il estoit assis a table en
la maison du Pharisien, apporta une boiste d’ongnement ;” — “but, lo, there was a woman of the city who was of wicked life,
who, having learned that he sat at table in the house of the Pharisee, brought a box of ointment.”
237 “Et les frottoit d’ongnement ;” — “and rubbed them with ointment.”
238 “Car elle est de mauvaise vie ;” — “for she is of wicked life.”
82John Calvin Commentary on Matthew, Mark, Luke - Volume 2
Simon’s mistake lies only in this: Not considering that Christ came to save what was lost, he
rashly concludes that Christ does not distinguish between the worthy and the unworthy. That we
may not share in this dislike, let us learn, first, that Christ was given as a Deliverer to miserable
and lost men, 239 and to restore them from death to life. Secondly, let every man examine himself
and his life, and then we will not wonder that others are admitted along with us, for no one will
dare to place himself above others. It is hypocrisy alone that leads men to be careless about
themselves, 240 and haughtily to despise others.
37.A woman who was a sinner The words stand literally as I have translated them,( ἥτις ἧν
ἁμαζτωλὸς .) Erasmus has chosen to take the pluperfect tense, who Had Been a sinner,241lest any
one should suppose that at that time she still was a sinner But by so doing, he departed from the
natural meaning; for Luke intended to express the place which the woman held in society, and the
opinion universally entertained respecting her. Though her sudden conversion had rendered her a
different person in the sight of God from what she had previously been, yet among men the disgrace
attaching to her former life had not yet been effaced. She was, therefore, in the general estimation
of men a sinner, that is, a woman of wicked and infamous life; and this led Simon to conclude,
though erroneously, that Christ had not the Spirit of discernment, since he was unacquainted with
that infamy which was generally known.242
40.And Jesus answering said.  By this reply Christ shows how egregiously Simon was mistaken.
Exposing to public view his silent and concealed thought, he proves himself to possess something
more excellent than what belonged to the Prophets; for he does not reply to his words, but refutes
the sentiment which he kept hidden within his breast. Nor was it only on Simon’s account that this
was done, but in order to assure every one of us, that we have no reason to fear lest any sinner be
rejected by him, who not only gives them kind and friendly invitations, but is prepared with equal
liberality, and—as we might say—with outstretched arms, to receive them all.
41.A certain creditor had two debtors  The scope of this parable is to demonstrate, that Simon
is wrong in condemning the woman who is acquitted by the heavenly judge. He proves that she is
righteous, not because she pleased God, but because her sins were forgiven; for otherwise her case
would not correspond to the parable, in which Christ expressly states, that the creditor freely forgave
the debtors who were not able to pay. We cannot avoid wondering, therefore, that the greater part
of commentators have fallen into so gross a blunder as to imagine that this woman, by her tears,
and her anointing, and her kissing his feet, deserved the pardon of her sins. The argument which
Christ employs was taken, not from the cause, but from the effect; for, until a favor has been
received, it cannot awaken gratitude, 243 and the cause of reciprocal love is here declared to be a
free forgiveness. In a word, Christ argues from the fruits or effects that follow it, that this woman
has been reconciled to God.
239 “Que Christ a este donne pour liberateur au genre humain, miserable et perdu ;” — “that Christ was given as a deliverer to
the human race, miserable and lost.”
240 “Qui fait que les hommes se me cognoissent ;” — “which makes men forget themselves.”
241 “Quoe fuerat peccatrix
242 “Veu qu’il ne cognoist point l’infamie de la vie de ceste femme qui estoit notoire a un chacun ;” — “since he does not know
the infamy of the life of this woman, which was notorious to every one.”
243 “Veu que le remerciment presuppose tousiours qu’on ait avant receuquelque bien ;” — “since gratitude always presupposes
that some favor has been received.”
83John Calvin Commentary on Matthew, Mark, Luke - Volume 2
44.And turning to the woman.  The Lord appears to compare Simon with the woman, in such
a manner as to make him chargeable with nothing more than light offenses. But this is spoken only
in the way of concession. “Suppose now, Simon,” he says, “that the guilt from which God discharges
thee was light, 244 and that this woman has been guilty of many and very heinous offenses. Yet you
see how she proves by the effect that she has obtained pardon. For what mean those profuse tears,
those frequent kisses of the feet, that precious ointment? What mean they but to acknowledge, that
she had been weighed down by an enormous burden of condemnation? And now she regards the
mercy of God with fervor of love proportioned to her conviction that her necessity had been great.”
From the words of Christ, therefore, we are not at liberty to infer, that Simon had been a debtor
to a small amount, or that he was absolved from guilt. 245 It is more probable that, as he was a blind
hypocrite, he was still plunged in the filth of his sins. But Christ insists on this single point, that,
however wicked the woman may have been, she gave undoubted proofs of her righteousness, by
leaving no kind of duty undone to testify her gratitude, and by acknowledging, in every possible
way, her vast obligations to God. At the same time, Christ reminds Simon, that he has no right to
flatter himself, as if he were free from all blame; for that he too needed mercy; and that if even he
does not obtain the favor of God without pardon, he ought to look upon this woman’s gifts, whatever
might have been her former sins, as evidences of repentance and gratitude.
We must attend to the points of contrast, in which the woman is preferred to Simon. She
moistened his feet with tears, and wiped them with the hairs of her head; while he did not even
order water to be given, according to custom. She did not cease to kiss his feet, while he did not
deign to receive Christ with the kiss of hospitality. 246She poured precious  ointment on his feet,
while he did not even anoint his head with oil.  But why did our Lord, who was a model of frugality
and economy, permit the expense of the ointment? It was because, in this way, the wretched sinner
testified that she owed all to him. He had no desire of such luxuries, was not gratified by the sweet
odor, and did not approve of gaudy dress. But he looked only at her extraordinary zeal to testify
her repentance, which is also held out to us by Luke as an example; for her sorrow, which is the
commencement of repentance, was proved by her tears. By placing herself at Christ’s feet behind
him, and there lying on the ground, she discovered her modesty and humility. By the ointment, she
declared that she offered, as a sacrifice to Christ, herself and all that she possessed. Every one of
these things it is our duty to imitate; but the pouring of the ointment was an extraordinary act, which
it would be improper to consider as a rule. 247
47.Her many sins are forgiven Some interpret the verb differently, may her many sins be
forgiven, and bring out the following meaning: — “As this woman evinces by remarkable actions,
that she is full of ardent love to Christ, it would be improper for the Church to act harshly and
severely towards her; but, on the contrary, she ought to be treated with gentleness, whatever may
have been the aggravations of her offenses.” But as ἀφέωνται is used, in accordance with the Athic
244 “Mettons le cas, Simon, que le fardeau des pechez, desquels Dieu t’a descharge fust petit ;” — “let us put the case, Simon,
that the burden of the sins, from which God has discharged thee, was small.”
245 “Et s’il avoit este absous de la condamnation qu’il avoit encourue ;” —”and if he had been absolved from the condemnation
which he had incurred.”
246 “En lieu que l’autre n’a pas mesme daigne le baiser par une facon commune de civilite ;” — “whereas the other did not even
deign to kiss him, according to an ordinary custom of civility.”
247 “A este un acte special et extraordinaire, duquel si on vouloit faire une reigle generale, ce seroit un abus ;” — “was a special
and extraordinary act, of which, if we wished to make a general rule, it would be a mistake.”
84John Calvin Commentary on Matthew, Mark, Luke - Volume 2
dialect, for ἀφεῖνται , we must dispense with that subtlety of exposition which is disapproved by
the context; for a little after, Christ uses the same words in his address to the woman, where the
imperative mood would not apply. Here, too is added a corresponding clause, that he to whom less
is forgiven loveth less
The verb, which is in the present tense, must, no doubt, be resolved into a preterite. 248 From
the eager desire which she had manifested to discharge all the duties of piety, Christ infers that,
although this woman might have been guilty of many sins, the mercy of God was so abundant
towards her, that she ought no longer to be regarded as a sinner. Again, loving is not here said to
be the cause of pardon, 249 but a subsequent manifestation, as I have formerly mentioned; for the
meaning of the words is this: — “They who perceive the display of deep piety in the woman form
an erroneous judgment, if they do not conclude that God is already reconciled to her;” so that the
free pardon of sins comes first in order. Christ does not inquire at what price men may purchase
the favor of God, but argues that God has already forgiven this wretched sinner, and that, therefore,
a mortal man ought not to treat her with severity.
48.Thy sins are forgiven.  It may be asked, why does Christ now promise to her the pardon
which she had obtained, and of which she had been assured? Some reply that these words were
uttered, not so much on her own account, as for the sake of others. For my own part, I have no
doubt that it was chiefly on her own account; and this appears more clearly from the words that
follow. Nor ought we to wonder, that the voice of Christ again pronounces an absolution of the
woman, who had already tasted his grace, and who was even convinced that he was her only refuge
of salvation. Thus, at the present day, faith is previously necessary, when we pray that the Lord
would forgive our sins; and yet this is not a useless or superfluous prayer, but the object of it is,
that the heavenly Judge may more and more seal his mercy on our hearts, and in this manner may
give us peace. Though this woman had brought with her a confident reliance on that grace which
she had obtained, yet this promise was not superfluous, but contributed greatly to the confirmation
of her faith.
49.And those who sat at table with him began to say within themselves.  Hence we again learn,
that ignorance of Christ’s office constantly leads men to conceive new grounds of offense. The
root of the evil is, that no one examines his own wretched condition, which undoubtedly would
arouse every man to seek a remedy. There is no reason to wonder that hypocrites, who slumber
amidst their vices, 250 should murmur at it as a thing new and unexpected, when Christ forgives
sins.
50.Thy faith hath saved thee.  To repress those murmurings, 251 and, at the same time, to confirm
the woman, Christ commends her faith. Let others grumble as they may, but do thou adhere
steadfastly to that faith which has brought thee an undoubted salvation. 252 At the same time, Christ
claims for himself the authority which had been given to him by the Father; for, as he possesses
248 “Combien qu’il faut resoudre le verbe du temps present en un temps passe: comme quand il dit, Ses pechez luy sont
pardonnez: il faut entendre, Ont este pardonnez ;” — “though the verb must be resolved from the present tense into a past tense:
as when he says, Her sins are forgiven, we must understand it to mean, Have been forgiven. ”
249 “Il n’est pas dit ici que la dilection ou amour des hommes envers Dieu soit la cause de la remission des pechez ;” — “it is
not here said that the loving, or the love of men towards God, is the cause of the forgiveness of sins.”
250 “Qui se plaisent et fiattent en leurs vices ;” — “who please and flatter themselves amidst their vices.”
251 “Pour reprimer les murmures de ces gens ;” — “to repress the murmurings of those people.”
252 “Qui t’a apporte certitude de salut ;” — “which has brought thee certainty of salvation.”
85John Calvin Commentary on Matthew, Mark, Luke - Volume 2
the power of healing, to him faith is properly directed. And this intimates that the woman was not
led by rashness or mistake to come to him, but that, through the guidance of the Spirit, she had
preserved the straight road of faith. Hence it follows, that we cannot believe in any other than the
Son of God, without considering that person to have the disposal of life and death. If the true reason
for believing in Christ be, that God hath given him authority to forgive sins, whenever faith is
rendered to another, that honor which is due to Christ must of necessity be taken from him. This
saying refutes also the error of those who imagine that the forgiveness of sins is purchased by
charity; for Christ lays down a quite different method, which is, that we embrace by faith the offered
mercy. The last clause, Go in peace,  denotes that inestimable fruit of faith which is so frequently
commended in Scripture. It brings peace and joy to the consciences, and prevents them from being
driven hither and thither by uneasiness and alarm.
