---
layout: reading-chapter
book_id: gospel_harmony
book_title: 加尔文福音书注释
author_id: calvin
author_name: 约翰·加尔文
section: "3"
section_title: "MATTHEW 11:7-15； LUKE 7:24-28"
header-img: psalm-bg-mountain.jpg
date: 2026-04-30 20:15
---

MATTHEW 11:7-15; LUKE 7:24-28
Luke 7:24-28 Matthew 11:7-15
24. And when the messengers of John had
departed, he began to say to the multitude7. And as they were departing, Jesus began
to say to the multitudes concerning John, What
concerning John, What went you out into the went you out into the wilderness to see? A reed,
wilderness to see? A reed, which is shaken by which is shaken by the wind? 8. But what went
the wind? 25. But what went you out to see? A
7 “Pource que tous non seulement sont bien aises de se retirer de Christ, mais aussi tachent malicieusement d’entrouver les
moyens ;” — “because not only are all strongly disposed to withdraw from Christ, but they even endeavor maliciously to discover
the means of doing so.”
5John Calvin Commentary on Matthew, Mark, Luke - Volume 2
man clothed with soft garments? 10 Lo, they that
live in magnificent attire, and in delicacies, areyou out to see? A man clothed in soft raiment? 8
Lo, they who wear soft clothing are in the houses
in the courts of kings. 26. But what went you out of kings. 9. But what went you out to see? A
to see? A Prophet? Yea, I say to you, and more Prophet? Yea, I say to you, and higher than a
than a Prophet. 27. It is he of whom it is written, Prophet. 10. For this is he of whom it is written,
Lo, I send my messenger 11 before my face, who Lo, I send my messenger before thy face, who
will prepare the way before thee. 11. Verily, Iwill prepare the way before thee. 28. For I say to
say to you, Among those who are born of women, you, Among those who are born of women, there
there hath not arisen a greater than John theis not a great Prophet than John the Baptist; yet
Baptist: yet he who is least in the kingdom ofhe that is least in the kingdom of God is greater
than he. heaven is greater than he. 12. And from the days
Luke 16:16 of John the Baptist to this day, the kingdom of
heaven suffereth violence, and the violent take it 16. The Law and the Prophets (were) till
John: since that time the kingdom of God is
preached, and all press violently into it.by force. 13. For all the Prophets and the Law
itself prophesied until John. 14. And if you are
willing to receive it, 9 he is Elijah, who was to
come. 15. He that hath ears to hear, let him hear. 
 
 
Matthew 11:7 .And while they were departing  Christ praises John before the people, in order
that they may state from recollection what they have heard from him, and may give credit to his
testimony. For his name was widely celebrated, and men spoke of him in lofty terms: but his doctrine
was held in less estimation, and there were even few that waited on his ministrations. Christ reminds
them, that those who went out to see him in the wilderness  lost their pains, if they did not devoutly
apply their minds and faculties to his doctrine. The meaning of the words, you went out into the
wilderness, is this: “Your journey would have been an act of foolish and ridiculous levity, if you
had not a fixed object in view. But it was neither worldly splendor nor any sort of amusement 12
that you were in quest of: your design was, to hear the voice of God from the mouth of the Prophet.
If therefore you would reap advantage from your undertaking, it is necessary that what he spoke
should remain fixed in your memory.”
8. Clothed with soft garments  Those who think that Christ here condemns the extravagance of
a court are mistaken. There are many other passages in which luxury of dress, and excessive attention
to outward appearance, are censured. But this passage simply means, that there was nothing in the
wilderness to attract the people from every quarter; that every thing there was rude and unpolished,
and fitted only to inspire disgust; and that such elegance of dress as delights the eyes is rather to
be looked for in the courts of kings. 13
10 “Vestu de precieux vestemens ?” — “clothed with costly garments?”
8 “Un homme vestu de precieux vestemens ?” — “A man clothed with costly garments?”
11 “Mon messager, ou, Angel ;” — “my messenger, or, Angel.”
9 “Si vous le voulez recevoir, ou, et si vous voulez recevoir mon dire ;” — “if you are willing to receive it, or, and if you are
willing to receive my saying.”
12 “Ni autre passe-temps et amusement vain ;” — “nor other pastime nor vain amusement.”
13 “Que pour voir de beaux vestemens et autres choses agencees bien proprement il faut plustost aller es Cours des Rois ;” —
“that in order to see fine dresses, and other things very neatly arranged, we must rather go to the courts of kings.”
6John Calvin Commentary on Matthew, Mark, Luke - Volume 2
11. Verily I say to you  These words not only maintain the authority of John, but elevate his
doctrine above the ancient prophets, that the people may keep in view the right end of his ministry;
for they mistook the design of his mission, and, in consequence of this, derived almost no advantage
from his discourses. Accordingly, Christ extols and places him above the rank of the prophets, and
gives the people to understand that he had received a special and more excellent commission. When
he elsewhere says respecting himself that he was not a Prophet, (John 1:21 ,) this is not inconsistent
with the designation here bestowed upon him by Christ. He was, no doubt, a Prophet, like others
whom God had appointed in his Church to be expounders of the Law, and messengers of his will;
but he was more excellent than the Prophets in this respect, that he did not, like them, make known
redemption at a distance and obscurely under shadows, but proclaimed that the time of redemption
was now manifest and at hand. Such too is the import of Malachi’s prediction, ( Malachi 3:1 ,) which
is immediately added, that the pre-eminence of John consisted in his being the herald and forerunner
of Christ; 14 for although the ancient Prophets spoke of his kingdom, they were not, like John, placed
before his face, to point him out as present. As to the other parts of the passage, the reader may
consult what has been said on the first chapter of Luke’s Gospel. 15
There hath not arisen  Our Lord proceeds farther, and declares that the ministers of the Gospel
will be as far superior to John as John was superior to the Prophets. Those who think that Christ
draws a comparison between himself and John have fallen into a strange blunder; for nothing is
said here about personal rank, but commendation is bestowed on the pre-eminence of office. This
appears more clearly from the words employed by Luke, there is not a greater Prophet; for they
expressly restrict his eminence to the office of teaching. In a word, this magnificent eulogium is
bestowed on John, that the Jews may observe more attentively the commission which he bore.
Again, the teachers who were afterwards to follow are placed above him, to show the surpassing
majesty of the Gospel above the Law, and above that preaching which came between them. Now,
as Christ intended to prepare the Jews for receiving the Gospel, we ought also, in the present day,
to be aroused to listen with reverence to Christ speaking to us from the lofty throne of his heavenly
glory; lest he take revenge for our contempt of him by that fearful curse which he pronounces on
unbelievers by Malachi in the same passage.
The kingdom of heaven and the kingdom of God denote the new condition of the Church, as in
other passages which have already occurred; for it was promised that at the coming of Christ all
things would be restored. He that is least in the kingdom. The Greek word μικρότερος , which I
have rendered least, is in the comparative degree, and signifies less; but the meaning is more clearly
brought out, that all the ministers of the Gospel are included. Many of them undoubtedly have
received a small portion of faith, and are therefore greatly inferior to John; but this does not prevent
their preaching from being superior to his, because it holds out Christ as having rendered complete
and eternal satisfaction by his one sacrifice, as the conqueror of death and the Lord of life, and
because it withdraws the vail, and elevates believers to the heavenly sanctuary.
12. Since the days of John  I have no doubt that Christ speaks honorably of the majesty of the
Gospel on this ground, that many sought after it with warm affection; for as God had raised up
John to be the herald of the kingdom of his Son, so the Spirit infused such efficacy into his doctrine,
14 “Pource qu’il est le Heraut marchant devant Christ pour luy faire honneur ;” — “because he is the Herald marching before
Christ to do him honor.”
15 Harmony, volume 1. p.20.
7John Calvin Commentary on Matthew, Mark, Luke - Volume 2
that it entered deeply into the hearts of men and kindled that zeal. It appears, therefore, that the
Gospel, which comes forward in a manner so sudden and extraordinary, 16 and awakens powerful
emotions, must have proceeded from God. But in the second clause is added this restriction, that
the violent take it by force  The greater part of men were no more excited than if the Prophets had
never uttered a word about Christ, or if John had never appeared as his witness; and therefore Christ
reminds them, that the violence, of which he had spoken, existed only in men of a particular class.
The meaning therefore is, A vast assembly of men is now collected, as if men were rushing violently
forward to seize the kingdom of God; for, aroused by the voice of one man, they come together in
crowds, and receive, not only with eagerness, but with vehement impetuosity, the grace which is
offered to them. Although very many are asleep, and are no more affected than if John in the
wilderness were acting a play which had no reference to them, yet many flock to him with ardent
zeal. The tendency of our Lord’s statement is to show, that those who pass by in a contemptuous
manner, and as it were with closed eyes, the power of God, which manifestly appears both in the
teacher and in the hearers, are inexcusable. Let us also learn from these words, what is the true
nature and operation of faith. It leads men not only to give, cold and indifferent assent when God
speaks, but to cherish warm affection towards Him, and to rush forward as it were with a violent
struggle.
Luke 16:16 . The Law and the Prophets were till John  Our Lord had said that the earnestness
of the people was a prelude to those things which the Prophets had foretold as to the future renovation
of the Church. He now compares the ministry of John to the Law and the Prophets  “It is not
wonderful,” he tells us, “that God should now act so powerfully on the minds of men; for he is not
as formerly, seen at a distance under dark shadows, but appears openly and at hand for the
establishment of his kingdom.” Hence it follows, that those who obstinately reject John’s doctrine
are less excusable than those who despised the Law and the Prophets
Matthew 11:13 . All the Prophets and the Law itself Prophesied . The word prophesied is
emphatic; for the Law and the Prophets did not present God before the eyes of men, but represented
him under figures and shadows as absent. The comparison, we now perceive, is intended to show,
that it is highly criminal in men to remain indifferent, when they have obtained a manifestation of
the presence of God, who held his ancient people in suspense by predictions. Christ does not class
John with the ministers of the Gospel, though he formerly assigned to him an intermediate station
between them and the Prophets. But there is no inconsistency here: for although John’s preaching
was a part of the Gospel, it was little more than a first lesson.
14. And if you are willing to receive it He now explains more clearly in what manner John began
to preach the kingdom of God  It was in the character of that Elijah, who was to be sent before the
face of God, ( Malachi 4:5 .) Our Lord’s meaning therefore is, that the great and dreadful day of the
Lord, which Malachi described, is now beheld by the Jews, when Elijah, who was there promised,
discharges his office as a herald. Again, by this exception, if you are willing to receive it, he glances
at their hardened obstinacy, in maliciously shutting their eyes against the clearest light. But will he
cease to be Elijah, if he shall not be received?  Christ does not mean that John’s official character
16 ”Laquelle tant soudainement gaigne les coeurs des hommes d’une facon non accoustumee, et y cause des mouvemens
merveilleux ;” — “which so suddenly gains the hearts of men in an unusual manner, and excites in them wonderful emotions.”
8John Calvin Commentary on Matthew, Mark, Luke - Volume 2
17 depends on their approbation; but having declared that he is Elijah, he charges them with
carelessness and ingratitude, if he does not obtain that respect to which he is entitled.
15. He that hath ears to hear, let him hear.  We know that it is customary with Christ to introduce
this sentence, whenever he treats of subjects which are highly important, and which deserve no
ordinary attention. 18 He reminds us, at the same time, of the reason why the mysteries of which he
speaks are not received by all. It is because many of his hearers are deaf, or at least have their ears
closed. But now, as every man is hindered not only by his own unbelief, but by the mutual influence
which men exercise on each other, Christ here exhorts the elect of God, whose ears have been
pierced, to consider attentively this remarkable secret of God, and not to remain deaf with
unbelievers.
