---
layout: reading-chapter
book_id: gospel_harmony
book_title: 加尔文福音书注释
author_id: calvin
author_name: 约翰·加尔文
section: "34"
section_title: "LUKE 16:1-15"
header-img: psalm-bg-mountain.jpg
date: 2026-04-30 20:15
---

LUKE 16:1-15
Luke 16:1-15
1. And he said also to his disciples, There was a certain rich man who had a steward, and he
was accused to him that he was wasting his estate. 2. And he called him, and said to him, What is
this that I hear of thee? render an account of thy stewardship, for thou shalt no longer have it in
thy power to be steward. 3. And the steward said within himself, What shall I do, since my master
taketh from me my stewardship? I cannot dig, and am ashamed to beg. 4. I know what I shall do,
that, when I shall be dismissed from the stewardship, they may receive me 294 into their houses.
5. Having therefore sent for each of his master’s debtors, he said to the first, How much owest
thou to my master? 6. And he said, A hundred baths of oil. And he said to him, Take thy bill, and
sit down quickly, and write fifty. 2957. Then he said to another, And how much owest thou? Who
293 “Tous ceux qui semblent s’estre rangez sous son enseigne ;” — “all those who appear to have ranked themselves under his
banner.”
294 “Que ‘quelques uns’ me recoyvent ;” — “that ‘some persons’ may receive me.”
295 “Et en escri cinquante ;” — “and write fifty of them.”
107John Calvin Commentary on Matthew, Mark, Luke - Volume 2
said, A hundred measures of barley. He saith to him, Take thy bill, and write eighty. 8. And the
master commended the unjust steward, because he had acted prudently; for the children of this
world are more prudent in their generation than the children of light. 9. And I say to you, Make
to yourselves friends of the unjust mammon, that, when you shall fail, they may receive you into
eternal habitations. 10. He that is faithful in that which is least is faithful also in much; and he that
is unjust in that which is least is unjust also in much. 11. If therefore you have not been faithful
in the unjust mammon, who shall entrust to you what is true? 29612. And if you have not been
faithful in what belongs to another, who will give you what is your own? — (A little after.) 14. And
the Pharisees, who were covetous, heard all these things, and they ridiculed him. 15. And he said
to them, It is you that, justify yourselves in the sight of men: but God knoweth your hearts; for
that which is highly esteemed among men is abomination in the sight of God.
 
 
The leading object of this parable is, to show that we ought to deal kindly and generously with
our neighbors; that, when we come to the judgment seat of God, we may reap the fruit of our
liberality. Though the parable appears to be harsh and far-fetched, yet the conclusion makes it
evident, that the design of Christ was nothing else than what I have stated. And hence we see, that
to inquire with great exactness into every minute part of a parable is an absurd mode of
philosophizing. Christ does not advise us to purchase by large donations the forgiveness of fraud,
and of extortion, and of wasteful expenditure, and of the other crimes associated with unfaithful
administration. But as all the blessings which God confers upon us are committed by Him to our
administration, our Lord now lays down a method of procedure, which will protect us against being
treated with rigor, when we come to render our account.
They who imagine that alms are a sufficient compensation for sensuality and debauchery, do
not sufficiently consider, that the first injunction given us is, to live in sobriety and temperance;
and that the next is, that the streams which flow to us come from a pure fountain. It is certain that
no man is so frugal, as not sometimes to waste the property which has been entrusted to him; and
that even those who practice the most rigid economy are not entirely free from the charge of
unfaithful stewardship. Add to this, that there are so many ways of abusing the gifts of God, that
some incur guilt in one way, and some in another. I do not even deny, that the very consciousness
of our own faulty stewardship ought to be felt by us as an additional excitement to kind actions.
But we ought to have quite another object in view, than to escape the judgment of God by
paying a price for our redemption; and that object is, first, that seasonable and well-judged liberality
may have the effect of restraining and moderating unnecessary expenses; and, secondly, that our
kindness to our brethren may draw down upon us the mercy of God. It is very far from being the
intention of Christ to point out to his disciples a way of escape, when the heavenly Judge shall
require them to give their account; but he warns them to lose no time in guarding against the
punishment which will await their cruelty, if they are found to have swallowed up the gifts of God,
and to have paid no attention to acts of beneficence. 297 We must always attend to this maxim, that
296 “Du vray ’thresor’ qui s’en fiera en vous ?” — “who shall entrust to you the true (treasure?)”
297 “S’il est trouve qu’ils n’ayent en aucun soin d’exercer charite envers leurs prochains, et n’ayent pense qu’a despendre en
tout exces et a leur plaisir, les biens de Dieu ;” — “if it is found that they have given themselves no concern about exercising
charity to their neighbors, and have thought only of spending in every excess, and at their own pleasure, the gifts of God.”
108John Calvin Commentary on Matthew, Mark, Luke - Volume 2
with what measure a man measures, it shall be recompensed to him again,
(Matthew 7:2 .)
8. And the master commended the unjust steward  Here it is obvious that if we were to attempt
to find a meaning for every minute circumstance, we would act absurdly. To make donations out
of what belongs to another man, is an action which is very far from deserving applause; and who
would patiently endure that an unprincipled villain should rob him of his property, and give it away
according to his own fancy? It were indeed the grossest stupidity, if that man who beheld a portion
of his substance taken away, should commend  the person who stole the remainder of it and bestowed
it on others. But Christ only meant what he adds a little afterwards, that ungodly and worldly men
are more industrious and skillful in conducting the affairs of this fading life, than the children of
God are anxious to obtain the heavenly and eternal life, or careful to make it the subject of their
study and meditation.
By this comparison he charges us with highly criminal indifference, in not providing for the
future, with at least as much earnestness as ungodly men display by attending to their own interests
in this world. How disgraceful is it that the children of light,  whom God enlightens by his Spirit
and word, should slumber and neglect the hope of eternal blessedness held out to them, while
worldly men are so eagerly bent on their own accommodations, and so provident and sagacious!
Hence we infer, that our Lord does not intend to compare the wisdom of the Spirit to the wisdom
of the flesh, (which could not have been done without pouring contempt on God himself,) but only
to arouse believers to consider more attentively what belongs to the future life, and not to shut their
eyes against the light of the Gospel, when they perceive that even the blind, amidst their darkness,
see more clearly. And, indeed, the children of light  ought to be more powerfully excited, when they
behold thechildren of this world  making provision against a distant period, for a life which is
fading, and which passes in a moment.
9. Make to yourselves friends.  As in the words which were last considered Christ did not enjoin
us to offer sacrifices to God out of the fruits of extortion, so now he does not mean that we ought
to search for defenders or advocates, who will throw around us the shield of their protection; but
teaches us that by acts of charity we obtain favor with God, who has promised, that to the merciful
he will show himself merciful, (Psalm 18:25 .) It is highly foolish and absurd to infer from this
passage, that the prayers or approbation of the dead are of service to us: for, on that supposition,
all that is bestowed on unworthy persons would be thrown away; but the depravity of men does
not prevent the Lord from placing on his records all that we have expended on the poor. The Lord
looks not to the persons, but to the work itself, so that our liberality, though it may happen to be
exercised towards ungrateful men, will be of avail to us in the sight of God. But then he appears
to intimate that eternal life depends on our merits. I reply: it is sufficiently plain from the context
that he speaks after the manner of men. One who possesses extensive influence or wealth, if he
procure friends during his prosperity, has persons who will support him when he is visited by
adversity. In like manner, our kindness to the poor will be a seasonable relief to us; for whatever
any man may have generously bestowed on his neighbors the Lord acknowledges as if it had been
done to himself.
When you fail.  By this word he expresses the time of death, and reminds us that the time of our
administration will be short, lest the confident expectation of a longer continuance of life should
make us take a firmer grasp. The greater part are sunk in slumber through their wealth; many
squander what they have on superfluities; while the niggardliness of others keeps it back, and
109John Calvin Commentary on Matthew, Mark, Luke - Volume 2
deprives both themselves and others of the benefit. Whence comes all this, but because they are
led astray by an unfounded expectation of long life, and give themselves up to every kind of
indulgence?
Of the mammon of unrighteousness.  By giving this name to riches, he intends to render them
an object of our suspicion, because for the most part they involve their possessors in unrighteousness
Though in themselves they are not evil, yet as it rarely happens that they are obtained without
deceit, or violence, or some other unlawful expedient, or that the enjoyment of them is
unaccompanied by pride, or luxury, or some other wicked disposition, Christ justly represents them
as worthy of our suspicion; just as on another occasion he called them thorns, (Matthew 13:7,22 .)
It would appear that a contrast, though not expressed, is intended to be supplied, to this effect; that
riches, which otherwise, in consequence of wicked abuse, polluted their possessors, and are almost
in every ease allurements of sin, ought to be directed to a contrary object, to be the means of
procuring favor for us. Let us also remember what I have formerly stated, that God does not demand
sacrifice to be made from booty unjustly acquired, as if he were the partner of thieves, and that it
is rather a warning given to believers to keep themselves free from unrighteousness
10. He who is faithful in that which is least.  Those maxims are proverbs taken from ordinary
practice and experience, and it is quite enough if they are generally true. It will sometimes happen,
no doubt, that a deceiver, who had disregarded a small gain, shall display his wickedness in a matter
of importance. Nay, many persons, by affecting honesty in trifling matters, are only in pursuit of
an enormous gain; 298 as that author 299 says: “Fraud establishes confidence in itself in small matters,
that, when a fit opportunity shall arrive, it may deceive with vast advantage.” And yet the statement
of Christ is not inaccurate; for in proverbs, as I have mentioned, we attend only to what usually
happens.
Christ, therefore, exhorts his disciples to act faithfully in small matters, in order to prepare
themselves for the exercise of fidelity in matters of the highest importance. He next applies this
doctrine to the proper stewardship of spiritual graces, which the world, indeed, does not estimate
according to their value, but which far surpass, beyond all question, the fading riches of this world.
Those persons, he tells us, who act improperly and unfaithfully in things of small value, such as
the transitory riches of the world, do not deserve that God should entrust to them the inestimable
treasure of the Gospel, and of similar gifts. There is, therefore, in these words an implied threatening,
that there is reason to fear lest, on account of our abuse of an earthly stewardship, we fail to obtain
heavenly gifts. In this sense, what is true is contrasted with riches, as what is solid and lasting is
contrasted with what is shadowy and fading. 300
12. And if you have not been faithful in what belongs to another.  By the expression, what belongs
to another,  he means what is not within man; for God does not bestow riches upon us on condition
that we shall be attached to them, but makes us stewards  of them in such a manner, that they may
not bind us with their chains. And, indeed, it is impossible that our minds should be free and
disengaged for dwelling in heaven, if we did not look upon every thing that is in the world as
belonging to another
298 “Et mesmes plusieurs sont contens d’user de simplicite et fidelite en de petites choses, a fin d’attraper puis apres un grand
profit tout d’un coup ;” — “and many are even willing to practice honesty and fidelity in small matters, in order afterwards to
seize all at once on a large profit.”
299 Livy.
300 “D’une chose caduque, et qui n’est qu’une ombre ;” — “with a fading thing, and which is only a shadow.”
110John Calvin Commentary on Matthew, Mark, Luke - Volume 2
Who shall entrust to you what is your own?  Spiritual riches, on the other hand, which relate to
a future life, are pronounced by him to be our own, because the enjoyment of them is everlasting.
But now he employs a different comparison. There is no reason, he tells us, to expect that we shall
make a proper and moderate use of our own property, if we have acted improperly or unfaithfully
in what belonged to another.  Men usually care less about abusing, and allow themselves greater
liberty in squandering, their own property, because they are not afraid that any person will find
fault with them; but when a thing has been entrusted to them either in charge or in loan, and of
which they must afterwards render an account, they are more cautious and more timid.
We thus ascertain Christ’s meaning to be, that they who are bad stewards of earthly blessings
would not be faithful guardians of spiritual gifts. He next introduces a sentence: You cannot serve
God and mammon; which I have explained at Matthew 6:24 . There the reader will find an explanation
of the word Mammon301
14. And the Pharisees, who were covetous, heard all these things. They  who imagine that Christ
was ridiculed by the Pharisees, because he chose to employ a plain and familiar style, and made
no use of swelling words, 302 do not sufficiently comprehend what Luke means. Haughty and
disdainful men, I do acknowledge, view the doctrine of the Gospel with contempt; but Luke expressly
declares the reason why Christ was the object of their derision to have been, that they were covetous
Entertaining a firm and deep-seated conviction that the rich are happy, and that there is nothing
better for men than to increase their wealth by every possible method, and earnestly to guard
whatever they have acquired, they reject as foolish paradoxes 303 all the sayings of Christ which
had a contrary tendency. And, certainly, any one that speaks of despising riches, or bestowing alms
on the poor, is regarded by the covetous as a madman. Horace’s words on this subject are well
known: 304 “The people hiss at me, but I am well satisfied with myself.” 305 But if, even when they
are condemned by universal opinion, they continue to flatter themselves, how much more will they
ridicule as a fable that philosophy of Christ which is far removed from the ordinary belief?
Some other pretense, I have no doubt, was held out by the Pharisees for ridiculing and evading
a doctrine which opposed their vice. But we must attend to the motive by which they were actuated;
for it is a disease which almost always prevails in the world, that the greater part of men affect to
despise whatever does not fall in with their corrupt morals. Hence the ridicule, and jest, and
merriment, with which the word of God is frequently assailed; for every man fights in defense of
his own vices, and all imagine that their witticisms will serve for a cloud to screen their criminality.
15. It is you that justify yourselves before men.  We see that Christ does not give way to their
disdainful conduct, but constantly maintains the authority of his doctrine in opposition to their
301 “Et la aussi on trouvera la signification de ce mot Mammona, lequel est ici mis, et que nous avons traduit Richesses  ” —
“And there will also be found the meaning of the word Mammon, which is used here, and which we have translated Riches. ”—In
an earlier portion of this Commentary, to which our author refers, (Harmony, vol. 1 p. 337 ,) no direct or formal explanation of
the word Mammon is to be found; but a careful reader of the expository remarks on Matthew 6:24  will easily perceive that Calvin
understands riches to be one of the two masters spoken of in that passage. An indirect definition of the term is afforded by his
French version of the text, both in Matth. 6:24 , and in Luke 16:13 , “Vous ne pouvez servir a Dieu et aux richesses ;” — “ you
cannot serve God and riches.”
302 “En affectant des termes exquis, et bien remplissans la bouehe ;”— “by affecting nicely chosen words, and that fill the
mouth well.”
303 “Comme choses absurdes, et contre l’opinion commune ;” — “as absurd statements, and opposed to the common belief.”
304 “Horace, Poete Latin, dit parlant en la personne d’un avaricieux ;” — “Horace, a Latin Poet, says, speaking in the person
of a covetous man.”
305 “Populus me sibilat, at mihi plaudo .”— Sat. 1. 1:66.
111John Calvin Commentary on Matthew, Mark, Luke - Volume 2
mockery; and it is the duty of all the ministers of the Gospel to pursue the same course, by meeting
ungodly despisers with the dreadful judgment of God. He declares that the hypocrisy, with which
they deceive the eyes of men, will be of no avail to them at the judgment-seat of God. They were
unwilling to have it thought that their mockery was intended as a defense of their covetousness.
But Christ affirms that this venom breaks out from a concealed ulcer; just as if one were to tell the
mitred prelates of our own day, that their hostility to the Gospel arises from the severity with which
it attacks their hidden vices.
But God knoweth your hearts.  He says that they reckon it enough if they appear to be good in
the eyes of men, and if they can boast of a pretended sanctity; but that God, who knoweth the hearts,
is well acquainted with the vices which they conceal from the view of the world. And here we must
attend to the distinction between the judgments of God and the judgments of men; for men bestow
approbation on outward appearances, but at the judgment-seat of God nothing is approved but an
upright heart. There is added a striking observation:
What is highly esteemed by men is abomination in the sight of God.  Not that God rejects those
virtues, the approbation of which He hath engraved on the hearts of men; but that God detests
whatever men are disposed, of their own accord, to applaud. Hence it is evident in what light we
ought to view all pretended acts of worship which the world contrives according to its own fancy.
How much soever they may please their inventors, Christ pronounces that they are not only vain
and worthless, but are even detestable.
