---
layout: reading-chapter
book_id: gospel_harmony
book_title: 加尔文福音书注释
author_id: calvin
author_name: 约翰·加尔文
section: "40"
section_title: "MATTHEW 13:53-58 ； MARK 6:1-6"
header-img: psalm-bg-mountain.jpg
date: 2026-04-30 20:15
---

MATTHEW 13:53-58 ; MARK 6:1-6
Mark 6:1-6 Matthew 13:53-58
1. And he departed thence, and came into his
own country, and his disciples followed him.53. And it happened, when Jesus had
concluded these discourses, 342 that he departed
2. And when it was Sabbath, he began to teach thence. 54. And when he was come into his own
in the synagogue, and many hearing were country, he taught them in their synagogue, so
amazed, saying, Whence hath this man these that they were amazed, and said, Whence hath
things? 343 And what is the wisdom that hath been this man this wisdom and these miracles? 55. Is
not this the carpenter’s son? Is not his mother given to him, so that such miracles are done by
called Mary, and his brothers James, and Joses, his hands? 3. Is not this the carpenter, the son of
and Simon, and Judas? 56. And his sisters, doMary, the brother of James, and Joses, and Judas,
not they all live amongst us? Whence then hath and Simon? Are not his sisters also here with us?
341 “La ou nous avons traduit, a veue d’oeil, le Grec a mot a mot avec observation; c’est a dire, avec quelque grande apparence,
en sorte qu’un chacun y puisse prendre garde .” — “Where we have rendered, visibly, the Greek literally runs, with observation;
that is to say, with some great display, so that every person may take notice of it.”
342 “Quand Iesus ent acheve ces similitudes-ci ;” — “when Jesus had concluded these parables.”
343 “D’ou vienent ces choses a cestuy-ci ?” — “Whence comes these things to this man?”
129John Calvin Commentary on Matthew, Mark, Luke - Volume 2
And they were offended at him. 4. And Jesus said
to them, A prophet is not devoid of honor, 344this man all these things? 57. And they were
offended at him. But Jesus said to them, A
except in his own country, and among his prophet is not destitute of honor, except in his
relatives, and in his own family. 5. And he could own country and in his own house. 58. And he
not perform any miracle there, except that he did not perform many miracles there on account
of their unbelief. cured a few sick persons by laying his hands on
  them. 6. And he wondered at their unbelief, and
walked about through the surrounding villages
teaching.
 
Matthew 13:53 .When Jesus had concluded. Matthew does not mean, that immediately after
delivering these discourses, he came into his own country; for it is evident from Mark, that some
interval of time elapsed. But the meaning is, that after having taught for some time in Judea, he
returned again to the Galileans, but did not receive from them kind treatment. A narrative which
Luke gives ( 4:22) is nearly similar, but is not the same. Nor ought we to wonder that Christ’s
countrymen, when they perceived that his family was mean and despised, and that he had been
poorly educated, were at first so much offended as to murmur at his doctrine, and afterwards
persevered in the same malice to such an extent, that they did not cease to slander him, when he
chose to discharge the office of a prophet amongst them. This second rejection of Christ shows that
the space of time which had intervened had not effected a reformation on the inhabitants of Nazareth,
but that the same contempt was constantly thrown as an obstacle in the way, to prevent them from
hearing Christ. 345
54.So that they were amazed.  They are struck with amazement at the novelty of the occurrence,
that Christ, who had not learned letters, but had been employed from youth to manhood in a
mechanical occupation, is so eminent a teacher, and is filled with divine wisdom. In this miracle
they ought to have perceived the hand of God; but their ingratitude made them cover themselves
with darkness. 346 They are compelled to admire him, whether they will or not; and yet they treat
him with contempt. And what is this but to reject a prophet whom God has taught, because he has
not been educated by men? They cut their throat by means of their own acknowledgment, when
they render so honorable a testimony to the doctrine of Christ, which after all has no influence on
them, because it does not take its origin, in the usual way, from the earth. Why do they not rather
lift their eyes to heaven, and learn that what exceeds human reason must have come from God?
Besides, the miracles, which were added to the doctrine, ought to have affected them the more
powerfully, or at least to have aroused them from their excessive carelessness and stupidity to
glorify God; for certainly, when God adopts unwonted methods of procedure, so much the more
clearly does he display the power of his hand. And yet this was the very reason why the inhabitants
of Nazareth maliciously drew a veil over their eyes. We see, then, that it is not mere ignorance that
344 “Un prophete n’est deshonore ;” — “a prophet is not dishonored.”
345 “A fin de n’approcher de luy, et de ne recevoir sa doctrine ;” — “that they might not approach to him, and might not receive
his doctrine.”
346 “Mais par leur ingratitude ils se sont eblouis l’entendement, a fin de ne faire leur profit de ce qu’ils voyoyent devant leurs
yeux ;” — “but by their ingratitude their understanding was dazzled, so that they did not derive advantage from what they saw
before their eyes.”
130John Calvin Commentary on Matthew, Mark, Luke - Volume 2
hinders men, but that, of their own accord, they search after grounds of offense, to prevent them
from following the path to which God invites. We ought rather to argue in the opposite way, that,
when human means fail, the power of God is clearly revealed to us, and ought to receive undivided
praise.
55.Is not this the carpenter’s son?  It was, we are aware, by the wonderful purpose of God, that
Christ remained in private life till he was thirty years of age. Most improperly and unjustly, therefore,
were the inhabitants of Nazareth offended on this account; for they ought rather to have received
him with reverence, as one who had suddenly come down from heaven. They see God working in
Christ, and intentionally turn away their eyes from this sight, to behold Joseph, and Mary, and all
his relatives; thus interposing a veil to shut out the clearest light. The word brothers, we have
formerly mentioned, is employed, agreeably to the Hebrew idiom, to denote any relatives whatever;
and, accordingly, Helvidius displayed excessive ignorance in concluding that Mary must have had
many sons, because Christ’s brothers are sometimes mentioned. 347
57.A prophet is not devoid of honor.  I have explained this statement at considerable length,
where it occurs in the Gospel of John, 348 (4:44.) It may, no doubt, be a general proverb, that those
who are distinguished by eminent gifts are nowhere held in less estimation than in their own country;
and this manifests the ingratitude of men, who, in proportion to the greater familiarity with which
God exhibits himself to them, are the more bold to reject him in the influences of his Spirit. I readily
agree, however, with Chrysostom, who thinks that this proverb was applied in a peculiar manner
to the Jews. But what was usually spoken against the whole nation, Christ now asserts with special
reference to his Galilean countrymen; for nowhere did he receive less honor than on his native soil.
There were good grounds for the charge which he brings against them, that, instead of being the
first to accept the grace offered to them, as they ought to have been, they drive him to a distance
from them; for it is truly extraordinary that a prophet of God, whom others warmly receive as a
newly-arrived stranger, should be despised in the place where he was born.
58.And he did not perform many miracles in that place. Mark states it more emphatically, that
he could not perform any miracle.  But they are perfectly agreed as to the substance of what is said,
that it was the impiety of Christ’s countrymen that closed the door against the performance of a
greater number of miracles among them. He had already given them some taste of his power; but
they willingly stupify themselves, so as to have no relish for it. Accordingly, Augustine justly
compares faith to the open mouth of a vessel, while he speaks of faith as resembling a stopper, by
which the vessel is closed, so as not to receive the liquor 349 which God pours into it. And undoubtedly
this is the case; for when the Lord perceives that his power is not accepted by us, he at length
withdraws it; and yet we complain that we are deprived of his aid, which our unbelief rejects and
drives far from us.
When Mark declares that Christ could not perform any miracles,  he represents the aggravated
guilt of those by whom his goodness was prevented; for certainly unbelievers, as far as lies in their
power, bind up the hands of God by their obstinacy; not that God is overcome, as if he were an
inferior, but because they do not permit him to display his power. We must observe, however, what
347 Jerome replied to Helvidius in a work entitled, Contra Helvidium de Beatoe Marioe Virginitate  CAVIN has formerly alluded
to the controversy between these two authors, (Harmony, vol. 1. p. 107 .) — Ed.
348 Our Author’s Preface to his Commentary on John’s Gospel is dated 1st January 1553;  while the Preface to the Harmony
is dated 1st August 1555.  This accounts for the former being always referred to as an earlier work. — Ed.
349 “La bonne liqueur ;” — “the good liquor.”
131John Calvin Commentary on Matthew, Mark, Luke - Volume 2
Mark adds, that some sick people, notwithstanding, were cured; for hence we infer, that the goodness
of Christ strove with their malice, and triumphed over every obstacle. 350 We have experience of
the same thing daily with respect to God; for, though he justly and reluctantly restrains his power,
because the entrance to us is shut against him, yet we see that he opens up a path for himself where
none exists, and ceases not to bestow favors upon us. What an amazing contest, that while we are
endeavoring by every possible method to hinder the grace of God from coming to us, it rises
victorious, and displays its efficacy in spite of all our exertions!
