---
layout: reading-chapter
book_id: gospel_harmony
book_title: 加尔文福音书注释
author_id: calvin
author_name: 约翰·加尔文
section: "43"
section_title: "LUKE 9:10-17"
header-img: psalm-bg-mountain.jpg
date: 2026-04-30 20:15
---

LUKE 9:10-17
Luke 9:10-17 Mark 6:30-44 Matthew 14:13-21
139John Calvin Commentary on Matthew, Mark, Luke - Volume 2
10. And the Apostles, having
returned, 375 related to him all30. And the Apostles
assembled to Jesus, and related13. When Jesus heard this,
he departed thence to a ship to a
that they had done. And he took to him all things, both what they desert place apart; and when the
them, and withdrew apart into a had done and what they had multitudes heard it, they
desert place, near a city which taught. 37231. And he said to followed him on foot out of the
is called Bethsaida. 11. And them, Come you apart into a cities. 14. And Jesus, when
when the multitudes knew it, desert place, and rest for a little. leaving (the ship,) saw a great
they followed him; and he For there were many who were multitude, and was moved with
received them, and spoke to coming and going, so that there compassion towards them, and
them about the kingdom of God, was not even leisure to take healed of such of them as were
and healed those who needed food. 373 . 32. And he went into diseased. 15. And when the
healing. 12. And the day began a desert place by ship apart. evening was drawing on, his
to decline; and the twelve 33. And the multitude saw them disciples came to him, saying, It
approached and said to him, departing, and many recognized is a desert place, and the time is
Send away the multitudes, that him, and ran hither on foot out now past: send the multitudes
they may go into the of all the cities, and went before away, that they may go into the
neighboring towns and villages, them, and came together to him. village, and purchase victuals for
and procure food; for we are 34. And Jesus, as he was leaving themselves. 16. And Jesus said
here in a desert place. 13. And (the ship,) saw a great multitude, to them, It is not necessary that
he said to them, Give you to and was moved with compassion they should go away: give you
them something to eat. And they towards them, because they were to them something to eat.
said, We have no more than five as sheep not having a shepherd, 17. And they say to him, We
loaves and two fishes; unless we and he began to teach them have nothing here but five
go and buy food for all this many things. 35. And when a loaves and two fishes. 18. And
people. 14. Now they were about great part of the day was already he said, Bring them hither to me.
five thousand men. And he saith past, his disciples came to him, 19. And he commanded the
to his disciples, Make them sit saying, It is a desert place, and multitudes to sit down on the
down, fifty in each division. the day is now far advanced. grass, and, taking the five loaves
15. And they did so, and made 36. Send them away, that they and the two fishes, and raising
them all sit down. 16. And, may go into the surrounding his eyes to heaven, he blessed.
taking the five loaves and the towns and villages and purchase370 And when he had broken the
two fishes, he raised his eyes to bread for themselves; for they loaves, he gave them to the
heaven, and blessed them, and having nothing to eat. 37. And disciples, and the disciples to the
broke them, 376 and gave them to he answering said to them, Give multitudes. 20. And they all ate,
you to them something to eat. and were satisfied, and carried the disciples to set before the
And they said to him Shall we away what remained of the multitude. 17. And they all ate,
go and purchase bread for two fragments 371 twelve baskets full. and were satisfied; and there was
hundred pence, and give them
375 “Quand les Apostres furent retournez ;” — “when the Apostles were returned.”
372 “Tout ce qu’ils avoyent fait et enseigne ;” — “all that they had done and taught.”
373 “Tellement qu’ils n’avoyent pas mesmes loisir de manger ;” — “so that they had not even leisure to eat.”
370 “Rendit graces ;” — “gave thanks.”
376 “Les benit, et les rompit .”
371 “Puis recueillerent le residu des pieces des pains ;” — “then gathered what was left of the pieces of bread.”
140John Calvin Commentary on Matthew, Mark, Luke - Volume 2
21. And they who had eaten
were nearly five thousand men,
besides women and children.carried away what was left of the
fragments twelve baskets.
 something to eat? 38. And he
said to them, How many loaves
have you? Go and see. And
when they knew, they say, Five,
and two fishes. 39. And he
commanded them to make them
all sit down, arranging the guests
on the green grass. 40. And they
sat down, arranged in hundreds,
and fifties. 41. And when he had
taken the five loaves and the two
fishes, raising his eyes to
heaven, he blessed, 374 and brake
the loaves, and gave to the
disciples to set before them, and
divided the two fishes among
them all. 42. And they all ate,
and were satisfied. 43. And they
carried away twelve baskets full
of the fragments and of the
fishes. 44. Now they who had
eaten were about five thousand
men.
 
Matthew 14:13 .When Jesus heard it. John,  who relates the same narrative, does not mention
the reason why Jesus crossed over to the opposite bank, (6: 5.) Mark and Luke differ somewhat
from Matthew; for they describe the occasion of the journey to have been to give some repose to
his disciples, after that they had returned from their embassy. But there is no contradiction here;
for it is possible that he intended to withdraw his disciples into a desert place, in order that he might
be more at leisure to train them for higher labors, and that, about the same time, an additional reason
arose out of the death of John. Minds which were still feeble might have been terrified by the death
of John, learning from the melancholy end of that eminent prophet what condition awaited them
all. Certainly, as it was formerly related that, when John was imprisoned, Christ removed from
Herod’s territory, in order to avoid his fury for the time, so we may now infer that Christ, in order
to keep his trembling disciples at a distance from the flame, withdrew into a desert place.
How long the Apostles were employed in their first embassy it is not in our power to determine;
for the Evangelists, as we have formerly remarked, either did not attend to dates, or did not observe
them with great exactness. I think it highly probable that their commission to proclaim the kingdom
of Christ was not confined to a single occasion, but that, as opportunities were offered, they either
repeated their visit to some places, or went to others after a lapse of time. The words, they came
together to him, I look upon as meaning that ever afterwards they were his constant attendants; as
374 “Rendit graces ;” — “gave thanks.”
141John Calvin Commentary on Matthew, Mark, Luke - Volume 2
if the Evangelist had said, that they did not leave their Master so as to be individually and constantly
employed in the ordinary office of teaching, but that, having discharged a temporary commission,
they went back to school to make greater advances in learning.
They followed him on foot out of the cities.  Though Christ, who foresaw all things before they
happened, was in no respect ignorant of what would take place, yet he wished, as a man, to forewarn
his disciples, that the fact might testify the anxiety which he had about them. The vast crowd that
had assembled shows how widely his fame was spread in every direction: and this left the Jews
without excuse in depriving themselves, by their own carelessness, of the salvation which was
offered to them; for even out of this great multitude, which was inflamed by a sudden zeal to follow
Christ, it is evident from what is stated by John, ( 6:66, 12:37 ) that not more than a very small
number yielded a true and steady adherence to his doctrine.
14.He was moved with compassion towards them. The other two Evangelists, and particularly
Mark, state more clearly the reason why this compassion  (συμπάθεια )was awakened in the mind
of Christ. It was because he saw famishing souls, whom the warmth of zeal had carried away from
their homes and led into a desert place This scarcity of teaching indicated a wretched state of
disorder; and accordingly Mark says that Jesus was moved with compassion towards them, because
they were as sheep not having a shepherd Not that, as to his Divine nature, he looked upon them
all as sheep, but that, as man, he judged according to the present aspect of the case. It was no small
manifestation of piety that they left their own homes, and flocked in crowds to the Prophet of God,
though he purposely concealed himself from them. Besides, it ought to be remarked, that Christ
was mindful of the character which he sustained; for he had been commanded to discharge the
duties of a public teacher, and was therefore bound to look upon all the Jews, for the time being,
as belonging to the flock of God and to the Church, till they withdrew from it.
So strongly was Christ moved by this feeling of compassion, that though, in common with his
disciples, he was fatigued and almost worn out by uninterrupted toil, he did not spare himself. He
had endeavored to obtain some relaxation, and that on his own account as well as for the sake of
his disciples; but when urgent duty calls him to additional labor, he willingly lays aside that private
consideration, 377 and devotes himself to teaching the multitudes. Although he has now laid aside
those feelings which belonged to him as a mortal man, yet there is no reason to doubt that he looks
down from heaven on poor sheep that have no shepherd, provided they ask relief of their wants.
Mark says, that he began to teach them MANY things; that is, he spent a long time in preaching,
that they might reap some lasting advantage. Luke says, that he spoke to them concerning the
Kingdom of God, which amounts to the same thing. Matthew makes no mention of any thing but
miracles, because they were of great importance in establishing Christ’s reputation; but it may
naturally be concluded that he did not leave out doctrine, which was a matter of the highest
importance.
15.When the evening was drawing on.  The disciples had now lost their object, and they see
that Christ is again absorbed in teaching, while the multitudes are so eager to receive instruction
that they do not think of retiring. They therefore advise that for the sake of attending to their bodily
wants, Christ should send them away into the neighboring villages.  He had purposely delayed till
now the miracle which he intended to perform; first, that his disciples might consider it more
377 “Mettant arriere ceste consideration particuliere de donner repos au corps ;”— “setting aside that private consideration of
giving rest to the body.”
142John Calvin Commentary on Matthew, Mark, Luke - Volume 2
attentively, and might thus derive from it greater advantage; and next, that the very circumstance
of the time might convince them that, though he does not prevent, and even does not immediately
supply, the wants of his people, yet he never ceases to care for them, but has always at hand the
assistance which he affords at the very time when it is required.
16.Give you to them something to eat.  As a fuller exposition of this miracle will be found at
the sixth chapter  of John’s Gospel, instead of troubling my readers with a repetition of what I have
said, I would rather send them to that exposition; but rather than pass over this passage entirely, I
shall offer a brief recapitulation. Hitherto Christ had bestowed his whole attention on feeding souls,
but now he includes within his duties as a shepherd the care even of their bodies. And in this way
he confirms his own saying, that to those who
seek the kingdom of God, and his righteousness,
all other things will be added, ( Matthew 6:33 .)
We have no right, indeed, to expect that Christ will always follow this method of supplying the
hungry and thirsty with food; but it is certain that he will never permit his own people to want the
necessaries of life, but will stretch out his hand from heaven, whenever he shall see it to be necessary
to relieve their necessities. Those who wish to have Christ for their provider, must first learn not
to long for refined luxuries, but to be satisfied with barley-bread.
Christ commanded that the people should sit down in companies; and he did so, first, that by
this arrangement of the ranks the miracle might be more manifest; secondly, that the number of the
men might be more easily ascertained, and that, while they looked at each other, they might in their
turn bear testimony to this heavenly favor. Thirdly, perceiving that his disciples were anxious, he
intended to make trial of their obedience by giving them an injunction which at first sight appeared
to be absurd; for, as no provisions were at hand, there was reason to wonder why Christ was making
arrangements that resembled a feast. To the same purpose is what follows, that he gave them the
loaves, in order that in their hands the astonishing increase might take place, and that they might
thus be the ministers of Christ’s divine power; for as if it had been of small importance that they
should be eye-witnesses, Christ determined that his power should be handled by them. 378Two
hundred pence, according to the computation of Budaeus, are worth about thirty-four French livres;
379 and so when the disciples speak of what is sufficient for them, that every one of them may take
a little,  they calculate at the rate of a farthing for each individual. Forming so high an estimate of
the sum of money that would be required to purchase bread barely sufficient for procuring a morsel
to the people, they are entitled to no small praise for their obedience, when they implicitly comply
with the command of Christ, and leave the result to his disposal.
19. He blessed.  In this passage, as in many others, blessing  denotes thanksgiving. Now Christ
has taught us, by his example, that we cannot partake of our food with holiness and purity, unless
we express our gratitude to God, from whose hand it comes to us. Accordingly, Paul tells us, that
378 “Car Christ ne se contentant point de leur faire voir de leurs propres yeux sa vertu, a voulu mesme qu’elle passast par leurs
mains, et qu’ils la touchassent ;”— “for Christ, not satisfied with making them see his power with their own eyes, determined
even that it should pass through their hands, and that they should touch it.”
379 The value of a livre was so much affected both by time and by place, that it is not easy to determine with exactness how it
was rated by Budaeus or Calvin. Most probably, the reference is to la livre Parisis , which was three times the value of a franc ,
or about two shillings and sixpence sterling; and thirty-four of these would amount to four pounds, five shillings, sterling. Now
reckoning the Roman denarius , or the eighth part of an ounce of silver, to be worth sevenpence halfpenny of our own money,
une livre Parisis must have been equal to four denarii , and therefore two hundred denarii must have been worth—not thirty-four
but fiftylivres Parisis, or six pounds, five shillings, sterling. —Ed.
143John Calvin Commentary on Matthew, Mark, Luke - Volume 2
every kind of food which God bestows upon us is sanctifed by the word of God and prayer, (1
Timothy 4:5 ;) by which he means, that brutal men, who do not regard by faith the blessing of God,
and do not offer to him thanksgiving, corrupt and pollute by the filth of their unbelief all that is by
nature pure; and, on the other hand, that they are corrupted and defiled by the food which they
swallow, because to unbelievers nothing is clean. Christ has therefore laid down for his followers
the proper manner of taking food, that they may not profane their own persons and the gifts of God
by wicked sacrilege.
Raising his eyes towards heaven.  This expresses warm and earnest supplication. Not that such
an attitude is at all times necessary when we pray, but because the Son of God did not choose to
disregard the outward forms which are fitted to aid human weakness. It ought also to be taken into
account, that to raise the eyes  upwards is an excitement well fitted to arouse us from sloth, when
our minds are too strongly fixed on the earth.
20. And carried away what was left.  The fragments that remained after satisfying so vast a
multitude of men were more than twelve times larger in quantity than what was at first put into
their hands, and this contributed not a little to the splendor of the miracle. In this way all came to
know that the power of Christ had not only created out of nothing the food that was necessary for
immediate use, but that, if it should be required, there was also provision for future wants; and, in
a word, Christ intended that, after the miracle had been wrought, a striking proof of it should still
remain, which, after being refreshed by food, they might contemplate at leisure.
Now though Christ does not every day multiply our bread, or feed men without the labor of
their hands or the cultivation of their fields, the advantage of this narrative extends even to us. If
we do not perceive that it is the blessing of God which multiplies the corn, that we may have a
sufficiency of food, the only obstacle is, our own indolence and ingratitude. That, after we have
been supported by the annual produce, there remains seed for the following year, and that this could
not have happened but for an increase from heaven, each of us would easily perceive, were he not
hindered by that very depravity which blinds the eyes both of the mind and of the flesh, so as not
to see a manifest work of God. Christ intended to declare that, as all things have been delivered
into his hands by the Father, so the food which we eat proceeds from his grace.
