---
layout: reading-chapter
book_id: gospel_harmony
book_title: 加尔文福音书注释
author_id: calvin
author_name: 约翰·加尔文
section: "44"
section_title: "MATTHEW 14:22-33 ； MARK 6:45-52"
header-img: psalm-bg-mountain.jpg
date: 2026-04-30 20:15
---

MATTHEW 14:22-33 ; MARK 6:45-52
Mark 6:45-52 Matthew 14:22-33
45. And immediately he constrained his
disciples to embark, and to go before him, across22. And immediately Jesus constrained his
disciples to embark, and to go before him to the
the lake, to Bethsaida, while he sent away the opposite bank, till he had sent away the
multitude. 46. And when he had sent them away, multitudes. 23. And when he had sent away the
he went into the mountain 380 to pray. 47. And multitudes, he went up into a mountain alone to
pray; and when the evening came, he was there when the evening came, the ship was in the midst
alone. 24. But the ship was now in the midst ofof the sea, and he was alone on the land. 48. And
380 “En la montagne .”
144John Calvin Commentary on Matthew, Mark, Luke - Volume 2
he saw that they had difficulty in rowing, (for the
wind was contrary to them;) and about the fourththe sea, tossed with waves; for the wind was
contrary. 25. And about the fourth watch of the
watch of the night he came to them, walking on night Jesus came to them, walking on the sea.
the sea, and intended to pass by them. 49. But 26. And when the disciples saw him walking on
when they saw him walking on the sea, they the sea, they were terrified, saying, It is an
thought that it was an apparition, and cried out; apparition, and cried out for fear. 27. But
50. For they all saw him, and were alarmed. And immediately Jesus spoke to them, saying, Take
immediately he spoke to them, and said to them, courage; it is I, be not afraid. 28. And Peter
Take courage; it is I, be not afraid. 51. And he replying to him said, Lord, if it be thou, bid me
went up to them into the ship, and the wind come to thee on the water. 29. And he said,
ceased; and they were greatly astonished within Come. And when Peter had come down out of
themselves beyond measure, and wondered. the ship, he walked on the water, to go to Jesus.
52. For they had not understood about the loaves;
for their heart was blinded. 38130. But when he perceived the wind to be
boisterous, he was afraid; and when he began to
  sink, he cried, saying, Lord, save me. 31. And
immediately Jesus stretched out his hand and
caught him, and said to him, O man of little faith,
why didst thou doubt? 32. And when they had
entered into the ship, the wind ceased. 33. Then
they that were in the ship approached and
worshipped him, saying, Truly thou art the Son
of God.
 
Matthew 14:22 .And immediately Jesus constrained his disciples  They must have been
constrained; for they would never, of their own accord, have left him, and gone to the other side.
Now in this they testify their great veneration for him, when, contrary to their own opinions, they
yield to his command and obey it. And, indeed, it had an appearance of absurdity, that he should
remain alone in a desert place, when night was approaching. But so much the greater commendation
is due to the submissiveness of those who set a higher value on the authority of their heavenly
teacher than on all that could be pleaded on the other side. And, indeed, we do not truly and perfectly
obey God, unless we implicitly follow whatever he commands, though our feelings may be opposed
to it. There is always the best reason, no doubt, for every thing that God does; but he often conceals
it from us for a time, in order to instruct us not to be wise in ourselves, but to depend entirely on
the expression of his will. And thus Christ constrained his disciples  to cross over, in order to train
them to that rule of obedience which I have mentioned; though there cannot be a doubt that he
intended to prepare the way for the miracle which will immediately come under our consideration.
23.He went up into a mountain alone.  It is probable that the Son of God, who was fully aware
of the tempest that was coming on, did not neglect the safety of his disciples in his prayers; and yet
we naturally wonder that he did not rather prevent the danger than employ himself in prayer. But
in discharging all the parts of his office as Mediator, he showed himself to be God and man, and
381 “Car ils n’avoyent point entendu le faict des pains, d’autant que leur coeur estoit aveugle, ou, estourdi ;” — “for they had
not understood what happened as to the loaves, because their heart was blinded, or, bewildered.”
145John Calvin Commentary on Matthew, Mark, Luke - Volume 2
exhibited proofs of both natures, as opportunities occurred. Though he had all things at his disposal,
he showed himself to be a man by praying; and this he did not hypocritically, but manifested sincere
and human affection towards us. In this manner his divine majesty was for a time concealed, but
was afterwards displayed at the proper time.
In going up into the mountain  he consulted his convenience, that he might have more leisure
for praying when removed from all noise. We know how easily the slightest interruptions destroy
the ardor of prayer, or at least make it languish and cool. Though Christ was in no danger of this
fault, yet he intended to warn us by his example, that we ought to be exceedingly careful to avail
ourselves of every assistance for setting our minds free from all the snares of the world, that we
may look direct towards heaven. Now in this respect solitude has a powerful influence, by disposing
those who engage in prayer, when God is their only witness, to be more on their guard, to pour
their heart into his bosom, to be more diligent in self-examination; and, in a word—remembering
that they have to do with God—to rise above themselves. At the same time, it must be observed,
that he did not lay down a fixed rule, as if we were never permitted to pray except in retirement;
for Paul enjoins us to pray everywhere, lifting up clean hands, (1 Timothy 2:8 ;) and Christ himself
sometimes prayed in presence of others, and even instructed his disciples to assemble together for
offering social prayer. But that permission to pray in all places does not hinder them from engaging
in secret prayer at proper seasons.
24.The ship was now in the midst of the sea.  The reader will find this narrative expounded by
me at the sixth chapter of John’s Gospel, and therefore I shall treat it more briefly here. When Christ
permitted his disciples to be tossed about in a perilous condition, for a time, by an opposing storm,
it was to fix their attention more powerfully on the assistance which he brought to them. For the
adverse wind arose about midnight, or at least a little before it, and Christ appears about the fourth
watch, that is, three hours before sunrise. Their arms were not more fatigued by rowing than their
faith was shaken by grievous terrors. But when they were urged by strong necessity to desire the
presence of their Master, it showed very extraordinary stupidity to be alarmed at his appearance as
if he had been a ghost.
For this reason Mark tells us, that  their heart was blinded,  and that  they understood not about
the loaves;  for that miracle had given abundant evidence that Christ possessed divine power to
assist his followers, and that he was careful to assist them, when necessity required. Justly, therefore,
are they now charged with stupidity in not immediately recollecting that heavenly power, having
beheld, on the preceding day, so astonishing a proof of it, which ought to have been still before
their eyes. It is, no doubt, true, that their blameworthy slowness of apprehension was the reason
why they were astonished; for they had not profited, as they ought to have done, by other and
preceding miracles. But the principal charge brought against them is blindness, in allowing so recent
an exhibition to fade from their memory, or rather in not directing their mind to the contemplation
of Christ’s divinity, of which the multiplication of the loaves was a sufficiently bright mirror.
Two things are expressed by the words of Mark; first, that they did not properly consider the
glory of Christ, which was exhibited in the multiplication of the loaves; and, secondly, a reason is
assigned, that their heart was blinded.  This appears to have been added, not only as an aggravation
of their fault, but as a warning to us respecting the corruption of our understanding, that we may
seek from the Lord new eyes. It certainly was a proof—as I have lately mentioned—of brutal
ignorance, that they did not perceive the power of God, when they might almost feel it with their
hands; but as the whole human race labors under the same disease, Mark purposely mentions
146John Calvin Commentary on Matthew, Mark, Luke - Volume 2
blindness, in order to inform us that it is no new thing if men have their eyes closed against the
manifest works of God, till they are enlightened from above; as Moses also said,
The Lord hath not yet given thee a heart to understand, ( Deuteronomy 29:4 .)
Now though the word heart more frequently denotes the will or the seat of the affections, yet
here, as in that passage which I have now quoted from Moses, it is put for the understanding.
27.But immediately Jesus spake to them.  As Christ is not known to be a Deliverer till he actually
makes his appearance, he speaks, and desires his disciples to recognize him. That confidence, to
which he exhorts them, is represented by him as founded on his presence; plainly implying that,
since they perceive him to be present with them, there are abundant grounds of hope. But as terror
had already overpowered their minds, he corrects that terror, lest it should hinder or abate their
confidence: not that they could all at once lay aside fear and experience unmingled joy, but because
it was necessary that the fear which had seized them should be allayed, that it might not destroy
their confidence. Although to the reprobate the voice of the Son of God is deadly, and his presence
appalling, yet the effect which they produce on believers is here described to us as widely different.
They cause inward peace and strong confidence to hold the sway over our hearts, that we may not
yield to carnal fears. But the reason why we are disturbed by unfounded and sudden alarms is, that
our ingratitude and wickedness prevent us from employing as shields the innumerable gifts of God,
which, if they were turned to proper account, would give us all necessary support. Now though
Christ appeared at the proper time for rendering assistance, yet the storm did not immediately cease,
till the disciples were more fully aroused both to desire and to expect his grace. And this deserves
our attention, as conveying the instruction, that there are good reasons why the Lord frequently
delays to bestow that deliverance which he has ready at hand.
28.And Peter answering.  The condition which he lays down shows that his faith was not yet
fully settled. If it is thou, says he, bid me come to thee on the water.  But he had heard Christ speak.
Why then does he still argue with himself under doubt and perplexity? While his faith is so small
and weak, a wish not well considered bursts into a flame. He ought rather to have judged of himself
according to his capacity, and to have supplicated from Christ an increase of faith, that by its
guidance and direction he might walk over seas and mountains. But now, without the wings of
faith, he desires to fly at will; and though the voice of Christ has not its due weight in his heart, he
desires that the waters should be firm under his feet. And yet there is no room to doubt that this
longing sprung from a good principle; but as it degenerates into a faulty excess, it cannot be
applauded as good.
Hence too it happens that Peter immediately begins to smart for his rashness. Let believers,
therefore, instructed by his example, beware of excessive haste. Wherever the Lord calls, we ought
to run with alacrity; but whoever proceeds farther, will learn from the mournful result what it is to
overleap the bounds which the Lord has prescribed. Yet it may be asked, Why does Christ comply
with Peter’s wish? for by so doing he seems to approve of it. But the answer is obvious. In many
eases God promotes our interests better by refusing our requests; but at times he yields to us, that
by experience we may be the more fully convinced of our own folly. In this manner, it happens
every day that, by granting to those who believe in him more than is actually needed, he trains them
to modesty and sober-mindedness for the future. Besides, this was of advantage to Peter and to the
other disciples, and it is of advantage to us at the present day. The power of Christ shone more
brightly in the person of Peter, when he admitted him as a companion, than if he had walked alone
on the waters. But Peter knows, and the rest see plainly, that, when he does not rest with a firm
147John Calvin Commentary on Matthew, Mark, Luke - Volume 2
faith, and rely on the Lord, the secret power of God, which formerly made the water solid, begins
to disappear; and yet Christ dealt gently with him by not permitting him to sink entirely under the
waters. 382 Both of these things happen to us; for as Peter was no sooner seized with fear than he
began to sink, so the fleeting and transitory thoughts of the flesh immediately cause us to sink in
the midst of our course of employments. 383 Meanwhile, the Lord indulges our weakness, and
stretches out his hand, that the waters may not swallow us up altogether. It must also be observed
that Peter, when he perceives the unhappy and painful consequences of his rashness, betakes himself
to the mercy of Christ. And we too, though enduring just punishment, ought to betake ourselves to
him, that he may have compassion on us, and bestow the aid of which we are unworthy.
31.O man of little faith.  While our Lord kindly preserves Peter, he does not connive at Peter’s
fault. Such is the object of the chastisement administered, when Peter is blamed for the weakness
of his faith. But a question arises, Does every kind of fear give evidence of a weakness of faith?
for Christ’s words seem to imply that, where faith reigns, there is no room for doubt. 384 I reply:
Christ reproves here that kind of doubt which was directly opposed to faith. A man may sometimes
doubt without any fault on his part; and that is, when the word of the Lord does not speak with
certainty on the matter. But the case was quite different with Peter, who had received an express
command from Christ, and had already experienced his power, and yet leaves that twofold support,
and falls into foolish and wicked fear.
33.They that were in the ship.  I understand these words to refer not only to the disciples, but
to the sailors and other passengers. So then those who had not yet declared that he was their Master,
instantly acknowledge that he is the Son of God, and by this term render to him the honor of the
Messiah. Though at that time this lofty mystery was not generally known, how God was to be
manifested in the flesh, (1 Timothy 3:16 ,) yet as they had learned from the prophets, that he who
was to be the Redeemer would be called the Son of God, those who under this designation proclaim
the glory of Christ, declare their belief that he is the Christ. 385
