---
layout: reading-chapter
book_id: gospel_harmony
book_title: 加尔文福音书注释
author_id: calvin
author_name: 约翰·加尔文
section: "45"
section_title: "MATTHEW 14:34-36 ； MARK 6:53-56"
header-img: psalm-bg-mountain.jpg
date: 2026-04-30 20:15
---

MATTHEW 14:34-36 ; MARK 6:53-56
Mark 6:53-56 Matthew 14:34-36
53. And when they had passed over, they
came into the country of Gennesareth, and34. And when they had passed over, they
came into the country of Gennesareth. 35. And
landed. 54. And when they had left the ship, they when the men of that place had recognized him,
immediately knew him. 38655. And, running they sent messengers into all the surrounding
country, and brought to him all that were through all that country round about, they began
382 “Ne permettant qu’il enfondre du tout en l’eau, et se noye ;” — “not allowing him to sink entirely in the water, and be
drowned.”
383 “Ainsi les vaines et folles pensees de la chair font qu’a tous coups nous defaillons au milieu des affaires, comme si nous
estions plongez en l’eau iusques par dessus la teste ;” — “so the vain and foolish thoughts of the flesh cause us to stumble at
every step in the midst of business, as if we were plunged in the water over the head.”
384 “Que Doute et Crainte ne peuvent avoir lieu ou la foy regne ;” — “that Doubt and Fear cannot have place where faith reigns.”
385 “Declarent qu’ils croyent qu’il est le Christ et le Messins ;” — “declare that they believe that he is the Christ and the Messiah.”
386 “(Les gens) le cognurent incontinent ;” — “(the people) immediately knew him.”
148John Calvin Commentary on Matthew, Mark, Luke - Volume 2
to carry to him in beds those that were sick,
wheresoever they heard that he was. 56. And todiseased. 36. And besought him that they might
ouch only the fringe of his robe; and as many as
touched were made whole. what place, soever he went, into villages, or into
  cities, or into towns, they laid the diseased in the
streets, and besought him that they might touch
only the fringe of his robe; and as many as
touched him were healed.
 
 
Matthew 14:34 .They came into the country of Gennesareth.  The Evangelists give that
designation to the country which borrowed its name from the lake, though it is uncertain if it was
not rather the name of the country that was bestowed on the lake; but that is a matter of little
consequence. Our chief business is, to attend to the object which the Evangelists have in view. It
is, to show that the glory of Christ was attested not by one or by another miracle, but that this part
of Judea was filled with innumerable proofs of it, the report of which might easily be carried to
Jerusalem and to other towns in every direction. Hence we infer, that singularly base and wicked
must have been the ingratitude of that nation which wickedly shut its eyes from perceiving, and
even endeavored, as far as lay in its power, to extinguish the brightness of the divine glory which
was exhibited before them. Our present business is, to perceive, amidst so large an assemblage of
miracles, the reason why Christ came, which was, that he might offer himself as a physician to heal
all the diseases of all men 387 For we must bear in mind what Matthew had formerly quoted from
the Prophet Isaiah, ( 53:4,) that in healing bodies he shadowed out something greater, namely, that
he restores our souls to health, and that it is his peculiar office to remove spiritual diseases. 388 He
is not now an inhabitant of the earth; but it is certain that, now that he is in heaven, he is authorized
to bestow those favors of which he then exhibited a visible proof. Now as we labor under every
kind of diseases till he heal us, let each of us not only present himself to him, but endeavor to bring
others who need the same remedy.
That they might touch the fringe.  There is reason to believe that they were under the influence
of some superstition, when they limited the grace of Christ to a touch of his robe; at least, they
defrauded him of a part of his honor, since they did not expect any efficacy 389 to be derived from
his bare word. But that he may not quench the smoking flax, (Isaiah 42:3 ,) he accommodates himself
to their ignorance. Yet there is nothing here that lends countenance to the views of those who seek
the grace of God in wood, or nails, or robes; while Scripture expressly declares, that we have no
right to form any conception respecting Christ but what is spiritual and consistent with his heavenly
glory. The weakness of those who, not knowing that Christ is God, desired to make a nearer approach
to him, was endured for a time. Now that he fills heaven and earth with the sweet savor of his grace,
we must embrace—not with hands or eyes, but by faith—the salvation which he offers to us from
heaven.
387 “En guairissant toutes sortes de maladies en toutes personnes ;” — “by healing all kinds of diseases in all persons.”
388 See Harmony, vol. 1, p. 251 .
389 “Veu qu’ils n’esperoyent point de sentir aucun secours de sa vertu ;” — “since they did not hope to experience any relief
from his power.”
149John Calvin Commentary on Matthew, Mark, Luke - Volume 2
