---
layout: reading-chapter
book_id: gospel_harmony
book_title: 加尔文福音书注释
author_id: calvin
author_name: 约翰·加尔文
section: "46"
section_title: "MATTHEW 15:1-9 ； MARK 7:1-13"
header-img: psalm-bg-mountain.jpg
date: 2026-04-30 20:15
---

MATTHEW 15:1-9 ; MARK 7:1-13
Mark 7:1-13 Matthew 15:1-9
1. And the Pharisees, and some of the scribes,
who had come from Jerusalem, assemble to him.1. Then scribes and Pharisees, who had come
from Jerusalem, approach to Jesus, saying,
2. And when they saw some of his disciples eat 2. Why do thy disciples transgress the tradition
bread with common, that is to say, with unwashen of the elders? for they wash not their hands when
hands, they found fault. 3. For the Pharisees. and they eat bread. 3. But he answering said to them,
all the Jews, do not take food without frequently Why do you also transgress the commandment
washing their hands, holding the traditions of the of God on account of 390 your tradition? 4. For
elders; 4. And returning from market, they eat God commanded, saying, Honor thy father and
not till they have washed; and many other things mother; and, He that curseth father or mother,
are there which they have undertaken to keep, dying let him die. 5. But you say, Whosoever
namely, the washings of cups, and pots, and shall say to his father or mother, Whatever is a
brazen vessels, and beds. 5. Then the Pharisees gift from me shall profit thee; and shall not honor
and scribes ask him, saying, Why do not thy his father or his mother. 6. Therefore you have
disciples walk according to the tradition of the annulled the commandment of God on account
elders, but eat bread with unwashen hands? of your tradition. 7. Hypocrites, Isaiah hath justly
6. And he answering said to them, Well hath prophesied concerning you, saying, 8. This
Isaiah prophesied concerning you hypocrites, as people draw nigh to me with their mouth, and
it is written, This people honor me with the lips, honor me with the lips; but their heart is far
but their heart is far from me. 7. But in vain do distant from me. 9. But in vain do they worship
me, teaching doctrines, commandments of men. they worship me, teaching doctrines,
  commandments of men. 8. For, laying aside the
commandments of God, you keep a tradition of
men, the washings of pots and cups, and many
other things similar to these you do. 9. And he
said to them, Well do you reject the
commandment of God, that you may keep your
own tradition. 10. For Moses said, Honor thy
father and mother; and, He that curseth father or
mother, dying let him die. 11. But you say, If a
man shall say to his father and mother, Every
Corban (that is, gift) that cometh from me shall
profit thee. 12. And you do not permit him to do
any thing more to his father or his mother.
13. Annulling the word of God by your tradition,
which you have delivered; and many things
similar to this you do.
 
 
390 “Propter ;” — “ par vostre ordonnance ;” — “by your statute.”
150John Calvin Commentary on Matthew, Mark, Luke - Volume 2
Matthew 15:1 .Then scribes and Pharisees.  As the fault that is here corrected is not only
common but highly dangerous, the passage is particularly worthy of our attention. We see the
extraordinary insolence that is displayed by men as to the form and manner of worshipping God;
for they are perpetually contriving new modes of worship, and when any one wishes to be thought
wiser than others, he displays his ingenuity on this subject. I speak not of foreigners, but of the
very domestics of the Church, on whom God has conferred the peculiar honor of declaring with
their lips the rule of godliness. God has laid down the manner in which he wishes that we should
worship him, and has included in his law the perfection of holiness. Yet a vast number of men, as
if it were a light and trivial matter to obey God and to keep what he enjoins, collect for themselves,
on every hand, many additions. Those who occupy places of authority bring forward their inventions
for this purpose, as if they were in possession of something more perfect than the word of the Lord.
This is followed by the slow growth of tyranny; for, when men have once assumed to themselves
the right to issue commands, they demand a rigid adherence to their laws, and do not allow the
smallest iota to be left out, either through contempt or through forgetfulness. The world cannot
endure lawful authority, and most violently rebels against enduring the Lord’s yoke, and yet easily
and willingly becomes entangled in the snares of vain traditions; nay, such bondage appears to be,
in the case of many, an object of desire. Meanwhile, the worship of God is corrupted, of which the
first and leading principle is obedience. The authority of men is preferred to the command of God.
Sternly, and therefore tyrannically, are the common people compelled to give their whole attention
to trifles. This passage teaches us, first, that all modes of worship invented by men are displeasing
to God, because he chooses that he alone shall be heard, in order to train and instruct us in true
godliness according to his own pleasure; secondly, that those who are not satisfied with the only
law of God, and weary themselves by attending to the traditions of men, are uselessly employed;
thirdly, that an outrage is committed against God, when the inventions of men are so highly extolled,
that the majesty of his law is almost lowered, or at least the reverence for it is abated.
Scribes who had come from Jerusalem.  With what design those scribes came to Jesus is not
stated; but I think it probable that their attention was excited by his fame, and that they came with
the desire of receiving instruction, provided that they should approve of him as a competent teacher;
391 though it is possible that they were sent to spy. However that may be, as they had brought their
haughty disdain along with them, they are easily provoked by the slightest offense to bite or snarl
at Christ. Hence we see with what difficulty those who are influenced by ambition and the lust of
power are brought to submit to sound doctrine. Those especially whose attachment to ceremonies
has been strengthened by long practice cannot endure any novelty, but loudly condemn every thing
to which they have not been accustomed. In short, any thing more haughty or more disdainful than
this class of men cannot be imagined.
Both Evangelists mention that they were scribes and Pharisees; but Matthew puts the scribes
first, and Mark puts them second. They convey the same meaning, that the scribes  belonged to
various sects, but that the Pharisees  were the leaders, because they occupied an honorable station,
and at that time held the government. That the Pharisees should be the first to take offense at
disregard of the laws of which they were authors ought not to excite surprise; for, as we have said,
though they boasted that they were expounders of the law, and though their name was derived from
391 “En cas qu’ils l’eussent trouve bon maistre a leur gre ;” — “provided that they should find him to be a good master to their
liking.”
151John Calvin Commentary on Matthew, Mark, Luke - Volume 2
that circumstance, 392 they had corrupted by their inventions the purity of the word of God. All the
traditions that then existed among the Jews had come out of their workshop; 393 and this was the
reason why they displayed more than ordinary zeal and bitterness in defending them.
2.Why do thy disciples transgress?  When we speak of human traditions, this question has no
reference to political laws, the use and object of which are widely different from enjoining the
manner in which we ought to worship God. But as there are various kinds of human traditions, we
must make some distinction among them. Some are manifestly wicked, for they inculcate acts of
worship which are wicked and diametrically opposed to the word of God. Others of them mingle
profane trifles with the worship of God, and corrupt its purity. Others, which are more plausible,
and are not chargeable with any remarkable fault, are condemned on this ground., that they are
imagined to be necessary to the worship of God; and thus there is a departure from sincere obedience
to God alone, and a snare is laid for the conscience.
To this last description the present passage unquestionably relates; for the washing of hands,
on which the Pharisees insisted, could not in itself be charged with wicked superstition; otherwise
Christ would not have permitted the water-pots to be used at the marriage, ( John 2:6 ,) if it had not
been an allowable ceremony; but the fault lay in this, that they did not think that God could be
properly worshipped in any other way. It was not without a specious pretext that the practice of
washings  was first introduced. We know how rigidly the Law of God demands outward cleanness;
not that the Lord intended that this should occupy the whole attention of his servants, but that they
might be more careful to guard against every spiritual defilement. But in washings  the Law preserved
some moderation. Next came teachers, who thought that they would not be reckoned sufficiently
acute, if they did not make some appendage to the word of God; 394 and hence arose washings  of
which no mention was made in the Law. The legislators themselves did not give out that they
delivered any thing new, 395 but only that they administered cautions, which would be of service to
assist in keeping the Law of God. But this was immediately followed by great abuse, when
ceremonies introduced by men began to be regarded as a part of divine worship; and again, when
in matters that were free and voluntary uniformity was absolutely enjoined. For it was always the
will of God, as we have already said, that he should be worshipped according to the rule laid down
in his word, and therefore no addition to his Law can be endured. Now as he permits believers to
have outward ceremonies, by means of which they may perform the exercises of godliness, so he
does not suffer them to mix up those ceremonies with his own word, as if religion consisted in
them. 396
For they wash not their hands.  The ground of offense is explained more fully by Mark; but the
substance of his explanation is, that many things were practiced by the scribes, which they had
voluntarily undertaken to keep. They were secondary laws invented by the curiosity of men, as if
the plain command of God were not enough. God commanded that those who had contracted any
392 See Harmony, vol. 1, p. 281 .
393 “Elles avoyent este forgees en leur boutique ;” — “they had been manufactured in their workshop.”
394 “Sinon qu’ils adioustassent a la parole de Dieu quelques repetasseries de leur invention ;” — “if they did not add to the word
of God some patches of their own invention.”
395 “Les premiers autheurs de ces loix ne disoyent pas qu’ils voulussent commander rien de nouveau ;” — “the first authors of
these laws did not say that they intended to issue any new command.”
396 “Qu’elles soyent meslees avec sa Parole, et mises en mesme rang, comme si quelque partie du service de Dieu gisoit en
icelles ;” — “that they should be mixed with his Word, and put in the same rank, as if any part of the worship of God lay in
them.”
152John Calvin Commentary on Matthew, Mark, Luke - Volume 2
defilement should wash themselves, ( Leviticus 11:25,28 ;) and this extended to cups, and pots, and
raiment, and other articles of household furniture, ( Leviticus 11:32 ,) that they might not touch any
thing that was polluted or unclean. But to invent other ablutions was idle and useless. 397 They were
not destitute of plausibility, as Paul tells us that the inventions of men have an appearance of
wisdom, (Colossians 2:23 ;) but if they had rested in the Law of God alone, that modesty would
have been more agreeable to Him than solicitude about small matters.
They were desirous to warn a person not to take food while he was unclean, through want of
consideration; but the Lord reckoned it enough to wash away those defilements of which they were
aware. Besides, no end or limit could be set to such cautions; for they could scarcely move a finger
without contracting some new spot or stain. But a far worse abuse lay in this, that the consciences
of men were tormented with scruples which led them to regard every person as chargeable with
pollution, who did not on every occasion wash his body with water. In persons who belonged to a
private rank they would perhaps have overlooked the neglect of this ceremony; but as they had
expected from Christ and his disciples something uncommon and extraordinary, they reckoned it
unbecoming that ceremonies, which were traditions of the elders, and the practice of which was
held sacred by the scribes, should not be observed by the disciples of a master who undertook to
reform the existing state of things.
It is a great mistake to compare the sprinkling of the water of purification, or, as the Papists
call it, blessed water, with the Jewish washing; for, by repeating so frequently the one baptism, 398
Papists do all that is in their power to efface it. Besides, this absurd sprinkling is used for exorcising.
399 But if it were lawful in itself, and were not accompanied by so many abuses, still we must always
condemn the urgency with which they demand it as if it were indispensable.
3.Why do you also transgress?  There are here two answers that are given by Christ, the former
of which is addressed, as we say, to the person; while the latter decides as to the fact and the question
in hand. Mark inverts that order; for he first represents Christ as speaking on the whole subject,
and afterwards adds the reproof which is directed against hypocrites. We shall follow the narrative
of Matthew. When the Lord, in his turn, puts the question to the scribes why they break the Law
of God on account of their traditions, he does not as yet pronounce a direct acquittal of his disciples
from the crime charged against them; but only points out how improper and unwarrantable is this
readiness to take offense. They are displeased when the commandments of men  are not observed
with exactness; and how much more criminal is it to spend the whole time in observing them, to
the disregard of the law of God? It is manifest, therefore, that their wrath is kindled rather by
ambition than by a proper kind of zeal, when they thus prefer men to God.
When he says that they transgress the commandments of God,  the meaning of the expression
is easily learned from the context. They did not openly or professedly set aside the law of God, so
as to look upon any thing as lawful which the law had forbidden; but there was an indirect
transgression  of it, for they permitted duties which God had enjoined to be neglected with impunity.
A plain and familiar instance is adduced by Christ. The commandment of God is, that children shall
397 “C’a este un amusement de gens oisifs, et qui ne scavoyent que faire ;” — “it was an amusement of persons that were idles
and did not know what to do.”
398 “Le Baptesme, qui suffit une fois receu ;” — “Baptism, which is enough when once received.”
399 “En apres, ceste badinerie d’eau beniste est appliquee a faire exorcismes et coniurations, et ils croyent fermement qu’elle
a vertu d’effacer les pechez ;” — “Besides, this foolery of blessed water is applied to exorcising and conjuring, and they firmly
believe that it has power to blot out sins.”
153John Calvin Commentary on Matthew, Mark, Luke - Volume 2
honor their parents, ( Exodus 20:12 .) Now as the sacred offerings yielded emolument to the priests,
the observance of them was so rigidly enforced, that men were taught to regard it as a more heinous
sin not to make a free-will offering than to defraud a parent of what was justly due to him. In short,
what the Law of God declared to be voluntary was, in the estimation of the scribes, of higher value
than one of the most important of the commandments of God. Whenever we are so eager to keep
the laws of men as to bestow less care and attention on keeping the law of God itself, we are held
as transgressing it. Shortly afterwards he says, that they had annulled the commandment of God
on account of the traditions of men;  for the scribes led the people to entertain so strong an attachment
to their own injunctions, that they did not allow them leisure to attend to the word of God. Again,
as they reckoned those persons to have discharged their duty well who obeyed these injunctions to
the letter, hence arose a liberty to commit sin; for whenever holiness is made to consist in any thing
else than in observing the Law of God, men are led to believe that the law may be violated without
danger.
Let any man now consider whether this wickedness does not at present abound more among
the Papists than it formerly did among the Jews. It is not indeed denied by the Pope, or by the whole
of his filthy clergy, that we ought to obey God; but when we come to the point, we find that they
consider the act of eating a morsel of flesh as nothing less than a capital crime, while theft or
fornication is regarded as a venial fault, and thus, on account of their traditions, they overturn the
Law of God; for it is utterly insufferable that the enactments of men shall withdraw any part of that
obedience which is due to God alone. Besides, the honor which God commands to be yielded to
parents extends to all the duties of filial piety. 400 The latter clause which Christ adds, that he who
curseth father or mother  deserves to be put to death, is intended to inform us, that it is no light or
unimportant precept to honor parents, since the violation of it is so severely punished. And this is
no small aggravation of the guilt of the scribes, that so severe a threatening does not terrify them
from granting an extension of liberty to those who despised their parents.
5.But you say, etc. The mode of expression is defective, and is more fully exhibited by Mark,
who adds, you suffer them not to do anything more to their father or to their mother  The meaning
is, that the scribes were altogether wrong in acquitting those persons who fail to perform their duties
to their parents, provided that this deficiency be supplied, on their part, by a voluntary sacrifice,
which might have been omitted without offending God. For we must not understand Christ’s words
to bear that the scribes had forbidden men to render all proper obedience; 401 but they were so eager
to pursue their own gain, that children were allowed, in the meantime, to neglect their duties to
their parents.
7.Well hath Isaiah prophesied concerning you.  Our Lord now proceeds farther; for he decides
on the question in hand, which he divides into two clauses. The first is, that they relied on outward
ceremonies alone, and set no value on true holiness, which consists in sincere uprightness of heart;
and the second is, that they worshipped God in a wrong way, according to their own fancy. Now
though his reproof of pretended and hypocritical holiness appears hitherto to be restricted to persons,
yet it includes the substance of this doctrine, from which the full conclusion was, first, that the
worship of God is spiritual, and does not consist in the sprinkling of water, or in any other ceremony;
400 “Comprend tous devoirs d’obeissance, secours, et soulagement ;” — “includes every duty of obedience, assistance, and
relief.”
401 “De faire aucune assistance au pere et a la mere ;” — “to grant any relief to their father or mother.”
154John Calvin Commentary on Matthew, Mark, Luke - Volume 2
and, secondly, that there is no reasonable worship of God but what is directed by the rule of his
word. Although Isaiah ( 29:13 ) did not prophesy for futurity alone, but had regard to the men of his
own age, yet Christ says that this prediction relates to the Pharisees and scribes, because they
resemble those ancient hypocrites with whom the prophet had to contend. Christ does not quote
that passage exactly as it stands; but the prophet expressly mentions two offenses by which the
Jews provoked against themselves the divine vengeance. With their lips  only, and by an outward
profession, they made a pretense of godliness; and, next, they turned aside to modes of worship
invented by men. First, then, it is wicked hypocrisy, when the honor which men render to God is
only in outward appearance; for to approach to God with the mouth, and to honor him with the
lips, would not be in itself evil, provided that the heart went before. The substance of what our Lord
states on this subject is, that, since the worship of God is spiritual, and as nothing pleases him that
is not accompanied by the inward sincerity of the heart, they who make holiness to consist in
outward display are hypocrites.
9.But in vain do they worship me The words of the prophet run literally thus: their fear toward
me has been taught by the precept of men. But Christ has faithfully and accurately given the meaning,
that in vain is God worshipped, when the will of men is substituted in the room of doctrine. By
these words, all kinds of will-worship, (ἐθελοθζησκεία ,)as Paul calls it, ( Colossians 2:23 ,) are
plainly condemned. For, as we have said, since God chooses to be worshipped in no other way than
according to his own appointment, he cannot endure new modes of worship to be devised. As soon
as men allow themselves to wander beyond the limits of the Word of God, the more labor and
anxiety they display in worshipping him, the heavier is the condemnation which they draw down
upon themselves; for by such inventions religion is dishonored.
Teaching doctrines, commandments of men  In these words there is what is called apposition;
402 for Christ declares them to be mistaken who bring forward, in the room of doctrine, the
commandments of men,  or who seek to obtain from them the rule for worshipping God. Let it
therefore be held as a settled principle, that, since obedience is more highly esteemed by God than
sacrifices, (1 Samuel 15:22,23 ,) all kinds of worship invented by men are of no estimation in his
sight; nay more, that, as the prophet declares, they are accursed and detestable.
