---
layout: reading-chapter
book_id: gospel_harmony
book_title: 加尔文福音书注释
author_id: calvin
author_name: 约翰·加尔文
section: "47"
section_title: "MATTHEW 15:10-20 ； MARK 7:14-23 ； LUKE 6:39"
header-img: psalm-bg-mountain.jpg
date: 2026-04-30 20:15
---

MATTHEW 15:10-20 ; MARK 7:14-23 ; LUKE 6:39
Luke 6:39 Mark 7:14-23 Matthew 15:10-20
39. And he spoke a parable
to them, 403 Can a blind man lead14. And when he had called
to him the whole multitude, he10. And having called the
multitudes to him, he said to
a blind man? Will not both fall
into the ditch?said to them, Listen to me, all of
you, and understand. 15. Therethem, Hear and understand.
11. What entereth into the mouth
402 “C’est une figure et facon de parler que les Latins nomment Apposition ;” — “it is a figure and mode of speech which the
Latins call Apposition.” — “The Latin Grammarians employ the word Appositio to denote a figure, by which two words, denoting
the same thing, are put in the same case, such as, Urbs Roma, Fluvius Sequana In the same sense the Greek word ἐπεξήγησις
was often used. — Ed.
403 “Pareillement il leur disoit une similitude ;” — “in like manner he spoke to them a parable.”
155John Calvin Commentary on Matthew, Mark, Luke - Volume 2
  is nothing from without a man
which, entering into him, canpolluteth not the man, but what
goes out of the mouth polluteth
pollute him; but those things the man. 12. Then his disciples
which come out of a man are the approaching said to him,
things which pollute a man. Knowest thou that the Pharisees
16. If any man have ears to hear, were offended when they heard
let him hear. 17. And when he that saying? 13. But he
had entered into the house, and answering, said, Every plant
withdrawn from the multitude, which my heavenly Father hath
his disciples asked him not planted shall be rooted up.
concerning the parable. 18. And 14. Let them alone: they are
he saith to them, Are you also blind leaders of the blind. And
void of understanding? Do you if a blind man shall lead a blind
not yet understand that man, both will fall into the ditch.
whatsoever entereth into a man 15. And Peter answering said to
from without cannot pollute him, Explain to us that parable.
him? 19. Because it entereth not 16. And Jesus said, Are you also
into his heart, but into the belly, still void of understanding?
and goeth out into the sink, 17. Do you not yet understand
purifying all the food? 20. And that whatever entereth into the
he said, It is what goeth out of a mouth passeth into the belly, and
man that polluteth him. 21. For is thrown into the sink? 18. But
from within, out of the heart of those things which proceed out
man proceed wicked thoughts, of the mouth come from the
adulteries, fornications, murders, heart itself, and they pollute the
22. Thefts, evil desires, frauds, man. 19. For our of the heart
deceit, wantonness, an evil eye, proceed wicked thoughts,
calumnies, pride, foolishness: murders, adulteries, fornications,
23. All these evil things proceed thefts, false testimonies,
from within, and pollute the
man.calumnies. 20. These are the
things which pollute the man.
  But to take food with unwashed
hands polluteth not the man.
 
Matthew 15:10 .And having called the multitudes to him.  Here Christ turns 404 to those who
are ready to receive instruction, and explains more fully the truth at which he had formerly glanced,
that the kingdom of God does not consist in meat and drink, as Paul also teaches us, ( Romans 14:17 ;)
for, since outward things are by nature pure, the use of them is free and pure, and uncleanness is
not contracted from the good creatures of God. It is therefore a general statement, that pollution
does not come from without into a man, but that the fountain is concealed within him. Now when
404 “Christ laissant la ces orgueilleux, se retourne vers les dociles ;” — “Christ, leaving there these proud men, turns towards
the teachable.”
156John Calvin Commentary on Matthew, Mark, Luke - Volume 2
he says that all the evil actions which any man performs come out of the mouth of man, he employs
a synecdoche;405 for he says so by way of allusion to the subject in hand, and conveys this instruction,
that we do not draw uncleanness into our mouth along with meat and drink, but that every kind of
defilement proceeds from ourselves.
Knowest thou that the Pharisees were offended?  As the scribes were presumptuous and
rebellious, Christ did not take great pains to pacify them, but satisfied himself with repelling their
hypocrisy and pride. The offense which they had formerly taken up was doubled, when they
perceived that—not through oversight, but seemingly on purpose—Christ despised their washings
as trifles. Now when Christ did not hesitate to inflame still more, by keen provocation, wicked and
malicious persons, let us learn from his example, that we ought not to be exceedingly solicitous to
please every one by what we say and do. His disciples, however—as is usually the case with ignorant
and unlearned people—no sooner perceive the result to be unfavorable, than they conclude that
Christ’s reply had been unseasonable and improper. 406 For the object of their advice was, to persuade
Christ to soothe the rage of the Pharisees by softening the harsh expression which he had employed.
407
It almost always happens with weak persons, that they form an unfavorable judgment about a
doctrine, as soon as they find that it is regarded with doubt or meets with opposition. And certainly
it were to be wished, that it should give no offense, but receive the calm approbation of all; but, as
the minds of many are blinded, and even their hearts are kindled into rage, by Satan, and as many
souls are held under the benumbing influence of brutal stupidity, it is impossible that all should
relish the true doctrine of salvation. Above all, we ought not to be surprised to behold the rage of
those who inwardly nourish the venom of malice and obstinacy. Yet we ought to take care that, so
far as may be in our power, our manner of teaching shall give no offense; but it would be the height
of madness to think of exercising greater moderation than we have been taught to do by our heavenly
Master. We see how his discourse was made an occasion of offense by wicked and obstinate men;
and we see at the same time, how that kind of offense which arose from malignity was treated by
him with contempt.
13.Every plant.  As the indifferent success of the doctrine had wounded their weak minds, Christ
intended to remedy this evil. Now the remedy which he proposes is, that good men ought not to be
distressed, or entertain less reverence for the doctrine, though to many it be an occasion of death.
It is a mistaken view of this passage which some have adopted, that all the inventions of men, and
every thing that has not proceeded from the mouth of God, must be rooted up and perish; for it was
rather to men that Christ referred, and the meaning is, that there is no reason to wonder if the doctrine
of salvation shall prove deadly to the reprobate, because they are always carried headlong to the
destruction to which they are doomed.
405 “Au reste, quand il dit que les maux qu’un chacun fait procedent de la bouche, c’est autant comme s’il disoit qu’ils procedent
de la personne mesme; et c’est une figure et maniere de parler qu’on appelle Synecdoche, quand on prend une partie pour le
tout;” — “besides, when he says that the evils which any man does proceed out of the mouth, it is as much as if he said that they
proceed from the person himself; and it is a figure and way of speaking that is called Synecdoche, when a part is taken for the
whole.”
406 “Voyans que le propos n’avoit pas este bien prins, il leur semble avis que Christ a respondu peu autrement qu’il ne faloit ;”
— “perceiving that the discourse was not well taken, they conclude that Christ had replied somewhat differently from what he
ought to have done.”
407 “En redressant ce qu’il avoit dit un peu trop asprement, comme il leur sembloit ;” — “by correcting what he had said a little
too harshly, as they imagined.”
157John Calvin Commentary on Matthew, Mark, Luke - Volume 2
By the persons that have been planted by the hand of God we are to understand those who, by
his free adoption, have been ingrafted into the tree of life, as Isaiah also, when speaking of the
Church renewed by the grace of God, calls it a branch planted by the Lord, ( Isaiah 60:21 .) Now as
salvation depends solely on the election of God, the reprobate must perish, in whatever way this
may be effected; not that they are innocent, and free from all blame, when God destroys them, but
because, by their own malice, they turn to their destruction all that is offered to them, however
salutary it may be. To those who willingly perish the Gospel thus becomes, as Paul assures us, the
savor of death unto death, (2 Corinthians 2:16 ;) for, though it is offered to all for salvation, it does
not yield this fruit in any but the elect. It belongs to a faithful and honest teacher to regulate every
thing which he brings forward by a regard to the advantage of all; but whenever the result is different,
let us take comfort from Christ’s reply. It is beautifully expressed by the parable, that the cause of
perdition does not lie in the doctrine, but that the reprobate who have no root in God, when the
doctrine is presented to them, throw out their hidden venom, and thus accelerate that death to which
they were already doomed.
Which my heavenly Father hath not planted.  Hypocrites, who appear for a time to have been
planted like good trees, are particularly described by Christ; for Epicureans, who are noted for open
and shameful contempt of God, cannot properly be said to resemble trees, but the description must
be intended to apply to those who have acquired celebrity by some vain appearance of godliness.
Such were the scribes, who towered in the Church of God like the cedars in Lebanon, and whose
revolt might on that account appear the more strange. Christ might have said that it is right that
those should perish who disdainfully reject salvation; but he rises higher, and asserts that no man
will remain steadfast, unless his salvation be secured by the election of God. By these words he
expressly declares, that the first origin of our salvation flows from that grace by which God elected
us to be his children before we were created.
14.Let them alone.  He sets them aside as unworthy of notice, and concludes that the offense
which they take ought not to give us much uneasiness. Hence has arisen the distinction, of which
we hear so much, about avoiding offenses, that we ought to beware of offending the weak, but if
any obstinate and malicious person take offense, we ought not to be uneasy; for, if we determined
to satisfy all obstinate people, we must bury Christ, who is the stone of offense, (1 Peter 2:8 .) Weak
persons, who are offended through ignorance, and afterwards return to just views, must be
distinguished from haughty and disdainful men who are themselves the authors of offenses. It is
of importance to attend to this distinction, in order that no one who is weak may be distressed
through our fault. But when wicked men dash themselves through their obstinacy, let us walk on
unmoved in the midst of offenses; for he who spares not weak brethren tramples, as it were, under
foot those to whom we are commanded to stretch out the hand. It would be idle to attend to others,
whom we cannot avoid offending, if we wish to keep the right path; and when, under the pretext
of taking offense, they happen to fall off and revolt from Christ, we must let them alone, that they
may not drag us along with them. 408
They are blind leaders of the blind.  Christ means that all who allow themselves to be driven
hither and thither at the disposal of those men will miserably perish; for when they stumble on a
plain road, it is evident that they are willfully blind. Why then should any one allow himself to be
directed by them, except that he might fall into the same ditch? Now Christ, who has risen upon
408 “De peur qu’ils nous tirent en perdition avec eux ;” — “lest they draw us to perdition along with them.”
158John Calvin Commentary on Matthew, Mark, Luke - Volume 2
us as the Sun of righteousness, (Malachi 4:2 ,) and not only points out the road to us by the torch
of his Gospel, but desires that we should keep it before us, justly calls on his disciples to shake off
that slothfulness, and not to wander, as it were, in the dark, for the sake of gratifying the blind. 409
Hence also we infer that all who, under the pretense of simplicity or modesty, give themselves up
to be deceived or ensnared by errors, are without excuse.
Luke 6:39 .And he spake to them a parable. Luke relates this saying without mentioning any
occurrence, but states generally, that Christ made use of this parable; as in recording many of
Christ’s discourses he says nothing as to the occasion on which they were delivered. It is no doubt
possible that Christ may have spoken this parable more than once; but, as no place more appropriate
was to be found, I have not hesitated to insert here what Luke relates without fixing the time.
Matthew 15:15 .And Peter answering said.  As the disciples betray excessive ignorance, Christ
justly reproves and upbraids them for being still void of understanding, and yet does not fail to act
as their teacher. What Matthew ascribes in a peculiar manner to Peter is related by Mark, in the
same sense, as a question put by them all; and this is evident from Christ’s reply, in which he
reproves the ignorance, not of Peter only, but of all of them alike. The general meaning is, that men
are not polluted by food, but that they have within themselves the pollution of sins, which afterwards
shows itself in the outward actions. Is it objected that intemperance in eating is defilement? The
solution is easy. Christ speaks only of the proper and lawful use of those things which God has put
in our power. To eat and drink are things in their own nature free and indifferent: if any corruption
be added, it proceeds from the man himself, and therefore must be regarded not as external, but
internal. 410
19.For out of the heart proceed wicked thoughts Hence we infer that the word mouth, as I have
mentioned, was used by Christ in a former verse by way of allusion to the context; for now he
makes no mention of the mouth, but merely says that out of the heart of man proceeds all that is
sinful and that corrupts by its pollution. Mark differs from Matthew in this respect, that he gives a
larger catalogue of sins, such as lusts, or irregular desires. The Greek word ( πλεονεξίαι )is by
some rendered covetousness; but I have preferred to take it in a general acceptation. Next come
fraud and intemperance, and those which immediately follow. Though the mode of expression be
figurative, it is enough to understand Christ’s meaning to be, that all sins proceed from the wicked
and corrupt affections of the heart. To say that an evil eye proceeds from the heart is not strictly
accurate, but it involves nothing that is absurd or ambiguous; for it means, that an unholy heart
pollutes the eyes by making them the ministers, or organs, of wicked desires. And yet Christ does
not speak as if every thing that is evil in man were confined to open sins; but, in order to show
more clearly that the heart of man is the abode of all evils,411 he says that the proofs and results
appear in the sins themselves.
And pollute the man. Instead of the verb pollute, the Greek term is κοινοῖ ,make common; as
Mark, a little before, ( 7:2,) used the phrase, κοιναῖς χερσὶ , with common hands, for with unclean
409 “A bon droict retire ses disciples de ceste nonchalance et stupidite de suyvre les aveugles, et pour leur faire plaisir d’aller
tastonnant en tenebres comme eux ;” — “properly withdraws his disciples from that indifference and stupidity in following the
blind, and—for the sake of gratifying them—in groping in the dark like them.”
410 “Et pourtant le vice est tousiours interieur, et ne vient point d’ailleurs ;” — “and therefore sin is always internal, and does
not come from without.”
411 “Que le coeur de l’homme est le siege et la source de tous maux ;” — “that the heart of man is the seat and the source of all
evils.”
159John Calvin Commentary on Matthew, Mark, Luke - Volume 2
hands.412It is a Hebrew phrase;413 for, since God had set apart the Jews on the condition that they
should separate themselves from all the pollutions of the Gentiles, everything that was inconsistent
with this holiness was called common, that is, profane.
