---
layout: reading-chapter
book_id: gospel_harmony
book_title: 加尔文福音书注释
author_id: calvin
author_name: 约翰·加尔文
section: "49"
section_title: "MATTHEW 15:29-39 ； MARK 7:31-37 , 8:1-10"
header-img: psalm-bg-mountain.jpg
date: 2026-04-30 20:15
---

MATTHEW 15:29-39 ; MARK 7:31-37 , 8:1-10
419 “De vouloir ainsi mettre la main sur la table des enfans, au milieu de souper ;” — “in wishing thus to put her hand to the
children’s table in the midst of the supper.”
420 “Pour se rebequer et heurter directement ;” — “to give a saucy and open contradiction.”
421 “Ceste femme, profane de nation ;” — “that woman, a heathen as to her nation.”
164John Calvin Commentary on Matthew, Mark, Luke - Volume 2
Mark 7:31-37 Matthew 15:29-39
31. And again, departing from the territories
of Tyre and Sidon, he came to the sea of Galilee,29. And Jesus departing thence, came near
the sea of Galilee, and he went up into the
through the midst of the territories of Decapolis. mountain, and sat down there. 30. And great
32. And they bring to him one who was deaf, and multitudes came to him, bringing with them the
had an impediment in his speech, and implore lame, the blind, the dumb, the maimed, and many
him to lay his hand on him. 33. And when he had others, and laid them at the feet of Jesus; and he
taken him aside from the multitude, he put his cured them: 31. So that the multitudes wondered,
fingers into his ears, and spat, and touched his when they perceived the dumb to speak, the
tongue; 34. And looking up to heaven, he sighed, maimed to be whole, the lame to walk, the blind
and said to him, Ephphatha, that is, Be opened. to see; and they glorified the God of Israel.
35. And immediately his ears were opened, and 32. And Jesus, having called his disciples to him,
the string of his tongue was loosed, and he spoke said, I have compassion on the multitude, because
distinctly. 36. Then he enjoined them not to tell they have now remained with me three days, and
it to any person; but the more he enjoined them, have nothing to eat; and I do not choose to send
so much the more the published it: 37. And were them away fasting, lest they faint by the way.
amazed beyond measure, saying, He hath done 33. His disciples say to him, Whence shall we
all things well; he maketh both the deaf to hear
and the dumb to speak.obtain so many loaves in a solitary place as to
satisfy so great a multitude? 34. And Jesus saith
Mark 8:1-10 to them, How many loaves have you? And they
say, Seven, and a few small fishes. 35. And he 1. In those days, when there wa a very great
multitude, and they had nothing to eat, Jesus commanded the multitudes to sit down on the
ground. 36. And he took those seven loaves, andcalled his disciples to him, and said to them, 2. I
the fishes, and after that he had given thanks, heam moved with compassion towards the
broke and gave to his disciples, and the disciples multitude, because they have now remained with
to the multitude. 37. And they all ate, and were me three days, and have nothing to eat. 3. And if
satisfied; and they took up of the fragments thatI shall send them home fasting, they will faint by
were left seven baskets full. 38. And they who the way; for some of them have come from a
had eaten were four thousand men, besides distance. 4. And his disciples answered him,
women and children. 39. And having sent away Whence shall any man be able to satisfy those
the multitudes, he embarked, and came to the
borders of Magdala.persons with bread in this solitary place? 5. And
he asked them, How many loaves have you? And
they said, Seven. 6. And he commanded the
multitude to sit down on the ground; and took
the seven loaves, and, when he had given thanks,
brake, and gave to his disciples to set before
them, and they set them before the multitude.
7. And they had a few small fishes; and when he
had blessed, he ordered these likewise to be set
before them. 8. And they ate, and were satisfied;
and of the fragments that remained they carried
away seven baskets full. 9. And they that had
165John Calvin Commentary on Matthew, Mark, Luke - Volume 2
eaten were about four thousand; and he sent them
away. 10. And immediately embarking, he came
with his disciples to the coasts of Dalmanutha.
 
 
Matthew 15:29 .And Jesus departing thence.  Though it is unquestionably the same journey of
Christ, on his return from the neighborhood of Sidon, that is related by Matthew and by Mark, yet
in some points they do not quite agree. It is of little moment that the one says he came to the borders
of Magdala , and the other, that he came to the coasts of Dalmanutha; for the cities were adjacent,
being situated on the lake of Gennesareth, and we need not wonder that the district which lay
between them received both names. 422
Decapolis was so called from its containing ( δέκα πόλεις ) ten cities; and as it was contiguous
to Phenicia and to that part of Galilee which lay towards the sea, Christ must have passed through
it, when he returned from Phenicia into Galilee of Judea. There is a greater appearance of
contradiction in another part of the narrative, where Matthew says that our Lord cured many who
labored under various diseases, while Mark takes no notice of any but of one deaf man. But this
difficulty need not detain us; for Mark selected for description a miracle which was performed
during the journey, and the report of which was no sooner circulated than it aroused the inhabitants
of every part of that country to bring many persons to Christ to be cured. Now we know that the
Evangelists are not anxious to relate all that Christ did, and are so far from dwelling largely on
miracles, that they only glance at a few by way of example. Besides, Mark was satisfied with
producing one instance, in which the power of Christ is as brightly displayed as in others of the
same sort which followed shortly afterwards.
Mark 7:32 . And they bring to him one who was deaf.  The reason why they implored him to lay
his hands upon him  may be learned from passages which we have already considered; for the laying
on of hands  was a solemn symbol of consecration, 423 and by means of it, the gifts of the Holy Spirit
were also bestowed. And there is no doubt that this ceremony was frequently used by Christ; so
that those men requested nothing but what they knew that he had been formerly in the habit of
doing. On the present occasion, Christ employs other symbols; for he puts his spittle on the tongue
of the dumb man, and puts his fingers into his ears.  The laying on of hands  would of itself have
been sufficiently efficacious, and even, without moving a finger, he might have accomplished it
by a single act of his will; but it is evident that he made abundant use of outward signs, when they
were found to be advantageous. Thus, by touching the tongue with spittle , he intended to point out
that the faculty of speech was communicated by himself alone; and by putting his finger into the
ears, he showed that it belonged to his office to pierce the ears of the deaf. There is no necessity
for having recourse to allegories; and we find that those who have amused themselves with ingenious
discussions on this subject, are so far from bringing forward any thing of real value, that they tend
rather to hold up the Scriptures to ridicule. Readers of sobriety and judgment will be satisfied with
422 “Est nomme maintenant de l’une, maintenant de l’autre ville ;” — “was named sometimes from the one, and sometimes
from the other town.”
423 “Pour dedier et eonsacrer les personnes ;” — “for dedicating and con-secrating persons.”
166John Calvin Commentary on Matthew, Mark, Luke - Volume 2
this single instruction, that we obtain from Christ, in answer to our prayers, both speech and hearing;
for he pours his energy into our tongues, and pierces our ears with his fingers.
33. And when he had taken him aside from the multitude. This was done, partly to afford to
those who were ignorant, and not yet sufficiently qualified for becoming witnesses, an opportunity
of perceiving at a distance the glory of his Divine nature, and partly that he might have a better
opportunity of pouring out earnest prayer. When he looked up to heaven and sighed ,it was an
expression of strong feeling; and this enables us to perceive the vehemence of his love towards
men, for whose miseries he feels so much compassion. Nor can it be doubted, that by conveying
the spittle from his own mouth to the mouth of another, and by putting his fingers into his ears, he
intended to manifest and express the same feeling of kindness. Yet that he has supreme power to
remove all our defects, and restore us to health, is proclaimed by him when he simply orders the
tongue and ears to be opened; for it was not without a good reason that Mark inserted that Chaldaic
word, ( ἐφφαθά ) Ephphatha , be opened ,but to testify the divine power of Christ. Among other
fooleries with which baptism has been debased by foolish men, the ceremony used by our Lord is
turned into a piece of buffoonery; and this instance shows us that there is no end to licentiousness,
when men wantonly change at their own pleasure the mysteries of God.
36. Then he enjoined them not to tell it to any person.  Many commentators torture these
injunctions to an opposite meaning, as if Christ had purposely excited them to spread abroad the
fame of the miracle; but I prefer a more natural interpretation which I have formerly stated, 424 that
Christ only intended to delay the publication of it till a more proper and convenient time. I have
no doubt, therefore, that their zeal was unseasonable, when, though enjoined to be silent, they were
in haste to speak. We need not wonder that men unaccustomed to the doctrine of Christ are carried
away by immoderate zeal, when it is not called for. Yet what they unwisely attempted to do, was
made by Christ to promote his own glory; for not only was the miracle made known, but the whole
of that district, in despising the Author of heavenly gifts, was rendered inexcusable.
37. He hath done all things well. Matthew, after collecting many miracles, concludes by saying
that the multitudes wondered, and glorified the God of Israel; that is, because God, taking unusual
methods of illustrating his power, had called up the remembrance of his covenant. But the words
of Mark contain perhaps an implied contrast; for the reports concerning Christ were various, and
the word multitude or crowd (ὄχλος ) may be intended to mean that it was only wicked and malicious
persons who slandered his actions, since all that he did was so far from exposing him to calumny
that it deserved the highest praise. But we know, and it is what nature teaches us, that nothing is
more unjust than to make the bestowal of favors an occasion of envy and ill-will.
Matthew 15:32 . I have compassion on the multitude.  Here a miracle is related not unlike another
which we have lately explained. The only difference is, that on the former occasion Christ satisfied
five thousand men  with five loaves and two fishes , while, on the present occasion,  four thousand
men are fed with seven loaves and a few small fishes;  and that twelve baskets  were then filled with
fragments, while out of a greater abundance a smaller portion is left. Let us learn from this, that
the power of God is not restricted to means or outward assistance, and that it is all one with Him
424 Harmony, vol. 1. p. 374 .
167John Calvin Commentary on Matthew, Mark, Luke - Volume 2
whether there be much or little, as Jonathan 425 said when speaking of his own moderate army and
the vast multitude of enemies:
there is no restraint to the Lord to save by many or by few,
(1 Samuel 14:6 .)
As the blessing of God can make one loaf suffice as well as twenty for satisfying a great
multitude, so, if that be wanting, a hundred loaves will not be a sufficient meal for ten men; for
when the staff of bread is broken , (Leviticus 26:26 ,) though the flour should come in full weight
from the mill, and the bread from the oven, it will serve no purpose to stuff the belly. The three
days’ fasting,  of which Christ speaks, must not be understood to mean that they had eaten nothing
for three days; but that in desert places they had few conveniences, and must have wanted their
ordinary food. Besides, in those warm countries, hunger is less keen than in our thick and cold
atmosphere; and, therefore, we need not wonder that they should abstain longer from food.
33.Whence shall we obtain so many loaves in a solitary place?  The disciples manifest excessive
stupidity in not remembering, at least, that earlier proof of the power and grace of Christ, which
they might have applied to the case in hand. As if they had never seen any thing of the same sort,
they forget to apply to him for relief. There is not a day on which a similar indifference does not
steal upon us; and we ought to be the more careful not to allow our minds to be drawn away from
the contemplation of divine benefits, that the experience of the past may lead us to expect for the
future the same assistance which God has already on one or more occasions bestowed upon us.
