---
layout: reading-chapter
book_id: gospel_harmony
book_title: 加尔文福音书注释
author_id: calvin
author_name: 约翰·加尔文
section: "5"
section_title: "LUKE 10:1-12"
header-img: psalm-bg-mountain.jpg
date: 2026-04-30 20:15
---

LUKE 10:1-12
27 “Le mot Grec que nous avons rendu par De;” — “the Greek word which we have translated by.”
28 “On void bien que la ce mot De se rapporte a la personne qui fait, et non pas a celuy qui souffre ;” — “It is very evident
that the word By relates to the person that acts, and not to him who suffers.”
12John Calvin Commentary on Matthew, Mark, Luke - Volume 2
Luke 10:1-12
1. And after these things the Lord appointed other seventy also, and sent them two by two
before his face into every city and place, to which he was to come 2. He said, therefore to them,
The harvest is indeed abundant, but the laborers are few; pray ye, therefore, the Lord of the harvest
to send out the laborers into his harvest 3. Go: behold, I send you as lambs among wolves. 4. Carry
neither purse, nor bag nor shoes, and salute no man by the way. 5. Into whatsoever house you shall
enter, first say, Peace be to this house. 6. And if the son of peace will remain upon it: but if not,
it will return to you. 7. And remain in the same house eating and drinking those things which shall
be given by them; 29 for the laborer is worthy of his hire. Go not from house to house.  8.  And into
whatsoever city you shall enter, and they shall receive you, eat those things which are set before
you: 9. And cure the diseased who are in it, and say to them, The kingdom of God is nigh to you.
10. And in whatsoever city you shall enter, and they shall not receive you, go out into its streets
and say, 11. Even the dust, which has cleaved to us from your city, we wipe off against you: yet
know this, that the kingdom of God is nigh to you. 12.  I say to you, That in that day it will be more
tolerable for Sodom than for that day.
 
Luke 10:1 .And after these things the Lord appointed  That the Apostles had returned to Christ
before these seventy were substituted in their room, may be inferred from many circumstances. The
twelve, therefore, were sent to awaken in the Jews the hope of an approaching salvation. After their
return, as it was necessary that higher expectation should be excited, others were sent in greater
numbers, as secondary heralds, to spread universally in every place the report of Christ’s coming.
Strictly speaking, they received no commission, but were only sent by Christ as heralds, to prepare
the minds of the people for receiving his doctrine. As to the number seventy, he appears to have
followed that order to which the people had already been long accustomed. We must bear in mind
what has been already said about the twelve Apostles, 30 that as this was the number of the tribes
when the people were in a flourishing condition, so an equal number of apostles or patriarchs was
chosen, to reassemble the members of the lacerated body, that the restoration of the Church might
thus be complete.
There was a similar reason for these seventy. Weknow that Moses, finding himself insufficient
for the burden, took seventy judges to be associated with him in governing the people, ( Exodus
18:22; 24:1 .) But when the Jews returned from the Babylonish captivity, they had a council or
συνέδριον —which was corrupted into Sanedrin31—consisting of seventy-two judges. As usually
happens with such numbers, when they spoke of the council, they called them only the seventy
judges; and Philo assures us, that they were chosen out of the posterity of David, that there might
be some remaining authority in the royal line. After various calamities, this was the finishing stroke,
when Herod abolished that council, and thus deprived the people of a legitimate share in the
government. Now as the return from Babylon prefigured a true and complete redemption, the reason
why our Lord chooses seventy heralds of his coming appears to be, to hold out the restoration of
29 “Mangeans et beuvans de ce qui sera mis devant vous ;” — “eating and drinking of what shall be set before you.”
30 Harmony, volume 1 p. 438 .
31 “Lequel les Grecs nomment Synedrion, et eux l’appeloyent par une prononciation corrompue Sanedrin ;” — “which the
Greeks denominate Synedrion, and which they, by a corrupt pronunciation, called Sanedrin.”
13John Calvin Commentary on Matthew, Mark, Luke - Volume 2
their fallen state; and as the people were to be united under one head, he does not give them authority
as judges, but only commands them to go before him, that he may possess the sole power. And sent
them by two and two. H e appears to have done so on account of their weakness. There was reason
to fear, that individually they would not have the boldness necessary for the vigorous discharge of
their office; and therefore, that they may encourage one another, they are sent by two and two
2.The harvest is indeed abundant.  I have explained this passage under the ninth chapter of
Matthew; 32 but it was proper to insert it again in this place, because it is related for a different
purpose. In order to stimulate his disciples the more powerfully to apply with diligence to their
work, he declares that the harvest is abundant:  and hence it follows, that their labor will not be
fruitless, but that they will find, in abundance, opportunities of employment, and means of usefulness.
He afterwards reminds them of dangers, contests, and annoyances, and bids them go and prepare
themselves for traversing with speed the whole of Judea. 33 In short, he repeats the same injunctions
which he had given to the Apostles; and, therefore, it would serve no good purpose to trouble the
reader here with many words, since a full exposition of all these matters may be found in the passage
already quoted. We may notice briefly, however, the meaning of that expression, salute no man by
the way. It indicates extreme haste, when, on meeting a person in the way, we pass on without
speaking to him, lest he should detain us even for a short time. Thus, when Elisha sent his servant
to the Shunamite woman, he charged him not to salute any person whom he met:
if thou meet any man, salute him not;
and if any salute thee, answer not again, ( 2 Kings 4:31 .)
Christ does not intend that his disciples shall be so unkind 34 as not to deign to salute persons
whom they meet, but bids them hasten forward, so as to pass by every thing that would detain them.
7.Eating and drinking those things which they shall give you  This is another circumstance
expressly mentioned by Luke. By these words Christ not only enjoins them to be satisfied with
ordinary and plain food, but allows them to eat at another man’s table. Their plain and natural
meaning is: “you will be at liberty to live at the expense of others, so long as you shall be on this
journey; for it is proper that those for whose benefit you labor should supply you with food.” Some
think that they were intended to remove scruples of conscience, that the disciples might not find
fault with any kind of food. 35 But nothing of this kind was intended, and it was not even his object
to enjoin frugality, but merely to permit them to accept of a reward, by living, during this
commission, at the expense of those by whom they were entertained.
