---
layout: reading-chapter
book_id: gospel_harmony
book_title: 加尔文福音书注释
author_id: calvin
author_name: 约翰·加尔文
section: "50"
section_title: "MATTHEW 16:1-4 ； MARK 8:11-13 ； LUKE 12:54-57"
header-img: psalm-bg-mountain.jpg
date: 2026-04-30 20:15
---

MATTHEW 16:1-4 ; MARK 8:11-13 ; LUKE 12:54-57
Luke 12:54-57 Mark 8:11-13 Matthew 16:1-4
54. And he said also to the
multitudes, When you see a11. And the Pharisees came,
and began to dispute with him,1. And the Pharisees,
together with the Sadducees,
cloud rising out of the west, you requesting from him a sign from came, and tempting desired that
immediately say, A shower is heaven tempting him. 12. And he would show them a sign from
coming; and so it is. 55. And he groaned in his spirit, and said, heaven. 2. But he answering said
when you perceive the south Why doth this generation ask a to them, About the
wind blowing, you say that there sign? Verily, I say to you, That commencement of the evening
will be hot weather; and so it is. no sign shall be given to this you say, It will be fine weather;
56. Hypocrites, you know how generation. 13. And he left them, for the sky is red. 3. And in the
to judge of the appearance of the and returned to the ship, and
departed across the lake.morning, There will be a storm
today; for the sky is red and sky and of the earth, and how
  lowering. Hypocrites, you can comes it that you do not
judge aright of the face of the understand this time? 57. And
sky; but can you not judge of the why even of yourselves do you
not judge what is right? signs of the times? 4. A wicked
425 Instead of Jonathan , the French copy mentions Asa, whose words are similar, and were uttered on a similar occasion: Lord ,
it is nothing with thee to help , whether with many , or with them that have no power , (2 Chronicles 14:11 .) — Ed.
168John Calvin Commentary on Matthew, Mark, Luke - Volume 2
  and adulterous nation demandeth
a sign, and no sign shall be given
to it but the sign of the prophet
Jonah. And he left them, and
departed.
 
 
Matthew 16:1 .And the Pharisees came.  Mark says that they began to dispute , from which we
may conjecture that, when they had been vanquished in argument, this was their last resource; as
obstinate men, whenever they are reduced to extremities, to avoid being compelled to yield to the
truth, are accustomed to introduce something which is foreign to the subject. Though the nature of
the dispute is not expressed, yet I think it probable that they debated about the calling of Christ,
why he ventured to make any innovation, and why he made such lofty pretensions, as if by his
coming he had fully restored the kingdom of God. Having nothing farther to object against his
doctrine, they demand that he shall give them a sign from heaven.  But it is certain that a hundred
signs would have no greater effect than the testimonies of Scripture. Besides, many miracles already
performed had placed before their eyes the power of Christ, and had almost enabled them to touch
it with their hands. Signs , by which Christ made himself familiarly known, are despised by them;
and how much less will they derive advantage from a distant and obscure sign? Thus the Papists
of our own day, as if the doctrine of the Gospel had not yet been proved, demand that it be ascertained
by means of new miracles.
The Pharisees, together with the Sadducees.  It deserves our attention that, though the Sadducees
and the Pharisees looked upon each other as enemies, and not only cherished bitter hatred, but
were continually engaged in hostilities, yet they enter into a mutual league against Christ. In like
manner, though ungodly men quarrel among themselves, their internal broils never prevent them
from conspiring against God, and entering into a compact for joining their hands in persecuting the
truth.
Tempting.  By this word the Evangelists mean that it was not with honest intentions, nor from
a desire of instruction, but by cunning and deceit, that they demanded what they thought that Christ
would refuse, or at least what they imagined was not in his power. Regarding him as utterly mean
and despicable, they had no other design than to expose his weakness, and to destroy all the applause
which he had hitherto obtained among the people. In this manner unbelievers are said to tempt God,
when they murmur at being denied what their fancy prompted them to ask, and charge God with
want of power.
2.About the commencement of the evening.  By these words Christ reminds them that his power
had been sufficiently manifested, so that they must have recognised the time of their visitation ,
(Luke 19:44 ,) had they not of their own accord shut their eyes, and refused to admit the clearest
light. The comparison which he employs is beautiful and highly appropriate; for, though the aspect
of the sky is changeable, so that sometimes a storm unexpectedly arises, and sometimes fair weather
springs up when it was not expected, yet the instructions of nature are sufficient to enable men to
predict from signs whether the day will be fair or cloudy. Christ therefore asks why they do not
recognize the kingdom of God, when it is made known by signs not less manifest; for this proved
clearly that they were excessively occupied with earthly and transitory advantages, and cared little
169John Calvin Commentary on Matthew, Mark, Luke - Volume 2
about any thing that related to the heavenly and spiritual life, and were blinded not so much by
mistake as by voluntary malice.
3.Hypocrites, you can judge.  He calls them hypocrites , because they pretend to ask that which,
if it were exhibited to them, they are resolved not to observe. The same reproof applies nearly to
the whole world; for men direct their ingenuity, and apply their senses, to immediate advantage;
and therefore there is scarcely any man who is not sufficiently well qualified in this respect, or at
least who is not tolerably acquainted with the means of gaining his object. How comes it then that
we feel no concern about the signs by which God invites us to himself? Is it not because every man
gives himself up to willing indifference, and extinguishes the light which is offered to him? The
calling of Christ, and the immediate exhibition of eternal salvation, were exhibited to the scribes
both by the Law and the Prophets, and by his own doctrine, to which miracles were added.
There are many persons of the same description in the present day, who plead that on intricate
subjects they have a good right to suspend their judgment, because they must wait till the matter
is fully ascertained. They go farther, and believe that it is a mark of prudence purposely to avoid
all inquiry into the truth; as if it were not an instance of shameful sloth that, while they are so eagerly
solicitous about the objects of the flesh and of the earth, they neglect the eternal salvation of their
souls, and at the same time contrive vain excuses for gross and stupid ignorance.
A very absurd inference is drawn by some ignorant persons from this passage, that we are not
at liberty to predict from the aspect of the sky whether we shall have fair or stormy weather. It is
rather an argument which Christ founds on the regular course of nature, that those men deserve to
perish for their ingratitude, who, while they are sufficiently acute in matters of the present life, yet
knowingly and willfully quench the heavenly light by their stupidity.
Mark 8:12 .And groaning in his spirit.  By these words Mark informs us that it occasioned grief
and bitter vexation to our Lord, when he saw those ungrateful men obstinately resist God. And
certainly all who are desirous to promote the glory of God, and who feel concern about the salvation
of men, ought to have such feelings that nothing would inflict on their hearts a deeper wound than
to see unbelievers purposely blocking up against themselves the way of believing, and employing
all their ingenuity in obscuring by their clouds the brightness of the word and works of God. The
words, in his spirit , appear to me to be added emphatically, to inform us that this groan proceeded
from the deepest affection of his heart, and that no sophist might allege that Christ resorted to
outward attitudes to express a grief which he did not inwardly feel; for that holy soul, which was
guided by the zeal of the Spirit, must have been moved by deep sadness at the sight of such wicked
obstinacy.
Luke 12:57 .And why even of yourselves, etc.?  Here Christ opens up the source of the evil, and,
as it were, applies the lancet to the ulcer. He tells them that they do not descend into their
consciences, and there examine with themselves, as in the presence of God, what is right. The
reason why hypocrites are so much disposed to make objections is, that they throw their swelling
words into the air without any concern, and never exercise calm thought, or place themselves at
the tribunal of God, that the truth, when once ascertained, may be fully embraced. When Luke says
that this was spoken to the multitudes , he does not contradict the narrative of Matthew and Mark;
for it is probable that Christ adapted his style generally to the followers and disciples of the scribes,
and to other despisers of God who resembled them, of whom he perceived that there were too many;
as the present complaint or expostulation was applicable to the whole of that rabble.
170John Calvin Commentary on Matthew, Mark, Luke - Volume 2
Matthew 16:4 .A wicked and adulterous nation.  This passage was explained 426 under Matthew
12:38 . The general meaning is, that the Jews are never satisfied with any signs , but are continually
tickled by a wicked desire to tempt God. He does not call them an adulterous nation merely because
they demand some kind of sign, (for the Lord sometimes permitted his people to do this,) but
because they deliberately provoke God; and therefore he threatens that, after he has risen from the
dead, he will be a prophet like Jonah. So Matthew at least says — for Mark does not mention Jonah
— but the meaning is the same; for, strictly speaking, this was intended to serve as a sign to them,
that Christ, when he had risen from the dead, would in every place cause the voice of his Gospel
to be distinctly heard.
