---
layout: reading-chapter
book_id: gospel_harmony
book_title: 加尔文福音书注释
author_id: calvin
author_name: 约翰·加尔文
section: "51"
section_title: "MATTHEW 16:5-12 ； MARK 8:14-21 ； LUKE 12:1"
header-img: psalm-bg-mountain.jpg
date: 2026-04-30 20:15
---

MATTHEW 16:5-12 ; MARK 8:14-21 ; LUKE 12:1
Luke 12:1 Mark 8:14-21 Matthew 16:5-12
1. And when an innumerable
multitude had assembled, 430 so14. And they had neglected
to take bread, and had not more5. And his disciples, when
they had come to the opposite
that they trod one upon another, than one loaf with them in the bank, through neglect had not
he began to say to his disciples, ship. 15. And he charged them taken bread. 4276. And Jesus said
Above all, beware 431 of the saying, Take heed and beware to them, Take heed and beware
of the leaven of the Pharisees, of the leaven of the Pharisees leaven of the Pharisees, which
is hypocrisy and of the leaven of Herod. and of the Sadducees. 7. But
16. And they reasoned within they considered within
themselves, saying, We have not themselves, saying, We have not
bread. 42917. And Jesus, taken bread. 4288. And when
perceiving this, said to them, Jesus knew this, he said to them,
Why do you reason that you Why do you think within
have no bread? Do you not yet yourselves, O you of little faith,
consider or understand? Have that you have not taken bread?
you your heart yet blinded? 9. Do you not yet understand,
18. Having eyes, do you not see? and do you not remember those
and having ears, do you not five loaves, when there were five
hear? and do you not remember? thousand men, and how many
19. When I broke the five baskets you carried away?
thousand men, how many 10. Nor those seven loaves,
baskets full of fragments did you when there were four thousand
carry away? They say to him, men, and how many baskets you
426 See page 93  of this volume.
430 “Cependant une multitude s’estant assemblee a milliers ;” — “mean while, a multitude having assembled by thousands.”
427 “Et quand les disciples furent venus outre, ils avoyent oublie a prendre les pains ;” — “and when the disciples were come
across, they had forgotten to take bread.”
431 “En premier lieu, donnez-vous garde ;” — “in the first place, beware.”
429 “[C’est pource que] nous n’avons point prins de pains ;” — “[it is because] we have not taken bread.”
428 “[C’est pource que] nous n’avons point prins de pains ;” — “[it is because] we have not taken bread.”
171John Calvin Commentary on Matthew, Mark, Luke - Volume 2
carried away? 11. How comes it
that you do not understand thatTwelve. 20. And when [I broke]
the seven among four thousand,
it was not about bread that I told how many baskets of the
you to beware of the leaven ofremains of the fragments did you
the Pharisees and of thecarry away? And they said,
Sadducees? 12. Then they Seven. 21. And he said to them,
understood that he did not bidHow is it that you do not
understand? them beware of the doctrine of
  the Pharisees and of the
Sadducees.
 
Matthew 16:5 .And when his disciples came.  Here Christ takes occasion from the circumstance
that had just occurred 432 to exhort his disciples to beware of every abuse that makes an inroad on
sincere piety. The Pharisees had come a little before; the Sadducees joined them; and apart from
them stood Herod, a very wicked man, and an opponent and corrupter of sound doctrine. In the
midst of these dangers it was very necessary to warn his disciples to be on their guard; for, since
the human mind has a natural inclination towards vanity and errors, when we are surrounded by
wicked inventions, spurious doctrines, and other plagues of the same sort, nothing is more easy
than to depart from the true and simple purity of the word of God; and if we once become entangled
in these things, it will never be possible for the true religion to hold an entire sway over us. But to
make the matter more clear, let us examine closely the words of Christ.
Beware of the leaven of the Pharisees.  Along with the Pharisees  Matthew mentions the
Sadducees  Instead of the latter, Mark speaks of Herod  Luke takes no notice of any but the Pharisees ,
(though it is not absolutely certain that it is the same discourse of Christ which Luke relates,) and
explains the leaven  to be hypocrisy  In short, he glances briefly at this sentence, as if there were no
ambiguity in the words. Now the metaphor of leaven , which is here applied to false doctrine, might
have been employed, at another time, to denote the hypocrisy of life and conduct, or the same words
might even have been repeated a second time. But there is no absurdity in saying, that those
circumstances which are more copiously detailed by the other two Evangelists, in the order in which
they took place, are slightly noticed by Luke in a manner somewhat different, and out of their proper
place or order, but without any real contradiction. If we choose to adopt this conjecture, hypocrisy
will denote here something different from a pretended and false appearance of wisdom. It will
denote the very source and occasion of empty display, which, though it holds out an imposing
aspect to the eyes of men, is of no estimation in the sight of God. For, as Jeremiah ( 5:3) tells us
that the eyes of the Lord behold the truth , so they that believe in his word are instructed to maintain
true godliness in such a manner as to cleave to righteousness with an honest and perfect heart; as
in these words,
An now, O Israel, what doth the Lord require from thee, but that thou shouldst cleave to him with
all thy heart, and with all thy soul? ( Deuteronomy 10:12 .)
On the other hand, the traditions of men, while they set aside spiritual worship, wear a temporary
disguise, as if God could be imposed upon by such deceptions; for to whatever extent outward
432 “Ici Christ prenant occasion des propos precedens ;” — “here Christ taking occasion from the former discourse.”
172John Calvin Commentary on Matthew, Mark, Luke - Volume 2
ceremonies may be carried, they are, in the sight of God, nothing more than childish trifles, unless
so far as they assist us in the exercise of true piety.
We now perceive the reason why hypocrisy was viewed by Luke as equivalent to doctrines
invented by men, and why he included under this name the leavens of men, which only puff up,
and in the sight of God contain nothing solid, and which even draw aside the minds of men from
the right study of piety to empty and insignificant ceremonies. But it will be better to abide by the
narrative of Matthew, which is more copious. The disciples, after having been reproved by our
Lord, came at length to understand that he had charged them to be on their guard against certain
doctrine. It was plainly, therefore, the intention of Christ to fortify them against prevailing abuses,
by which they were attacked on all sides. The Pharisees  and Sadducees  were expressly named,
because those two sects maintained at that time a tyrannical sway in the Church, and held opinions
so utterly subversive of the doctrine of the Law and the Prophets, that almost nothing remained
pure and entire.
But Herod did not in any way profess to teach; and a question arises, why does Mark class him
with false teachers? Beware of the leaven of the Pharisees, and Of The Leaven Of Herod . I reply:
he was half a Jew, was mean and treacherous, and availed himself of every contrivance that was
within his reach to draw the people to his side; for it is customary with all apostates to contrive
some mixture, for the purpose of establishing a new religion by which the former may be abolished.
It was because he was laboring craftily to subvert the principles of true and ancient piety, and thus
to give currency to a religion that would be exceedingly adapted to his tyranny, or rather because
he was endeavoring to introduce some new form of Judaism, that our Lord most properly charged
them to beware of his leaven.  From the temple of God the scribes disseminated their errors, and
the court of Herod was another workshop of Satan, in which errors of a different kind were
manufactured.
Thus in our own day we find that not only from Popish temples, and from the dens of sophists
and monks, does Antichrist vomit out her impostures, but that there is a Theology of the Court,
which lends its aid to prop up the throne of Antichrist, so that no stratagem is left untried. But as
Christ opposed the evils which then prevailed, and as he aroused the minds of his followers to guard
against those which were the most dangerous, let us learn from his example to make a prudent
inquiry what are the abuses that may now do us injury. Sooner shall water mix with fire than any
man shall succeed in reconciling the inventions of the Pope with the Gospel. Whoever desires to
become honestly a disciple of Christ, must be careful to keep his mind pure from those leavens;
and if he has already imbibed them, he must labor to purify himself till none of their polluting
effects remain. There are restless men, on the other hand, who have endeavored in various ways
to corrupt sound doctrine, and, in guarding also against such impostures, believers must maintain
a strict watch, that they may keep a perpetual Passover
with the unleavened bread of sincerity and truth,
(1 Corinthians 5:8 .)
And as on every hand there now rages an impiety like that of Lucian, 433 a most pernicious
leaven, or rather a worse than deadly poison, let them exercise this very needful caution, and apply
to it all their senses.
433 “L’mpiete des Lucianistes et des Atheistes ;” — “the impiety of the Lucianists and Atheists.” Lucian , a celebrated Greek
writer, of the second century of the Christian era, author of Dialogues of the Dead , is here alluded to as the type of scoffers and
173John Calvin Commentary on Matthew, Mark, Luke - Volume 2
8.Why do you think within yourselves, etc.?  The disciples again show how little they had profited
by the instructions of their Master, and by his wonderful works. What he had said about being on
their guard against the leaven is rashly interpreted by them as if Christ intended only to withdraw
them from outward intercourse. As it was customary among the Jews not to take food in company
with irreligious men, the disciples imagine that the Pharisees were classed with such persons. This
ignorance might perhaps have been endured; but they are forgetful of a favor which they lately
received, and do not consider that Christ has the remedy his power to hinder them from being
compelled to pollute themselves by meat and drink, and therefore he reproves them sharply, as they
deserved. And certainly it was shameful ingratitude that, after having seen bread created out of
nothing, and in such abundance as to satisfy many thousands of men, and after having seen this
done twice, they are now anxious about bread, as if their Master did not always possess the same
power. From these words we infer that all who have once or twice experienced the power of God,
and distrust it for the future are convicted of unbelief; for it is faith that cherishes in our hearts the
remembrance of the gifts of God, and faith must have been laid asleep, if we allow them to be
forgotten.
12.Then they understood.  The word leaven is very evidently used by Christ as contrasted with
the pure and uncorrupted word of God. In a former passage, ( Matthew 13:33 ,) Christ had used the
word in a good sense, when he said that the Gospel resembled leaven;434 but for the most part this
word is employed in Scripture to denote some foreign substance, by which the native purity of any
thing is impaired. In this passage, the naked truth of God, and the inventions which men contrive
out of their own brain, are unquestionably the two things that are contrasted. The sophist must not
hope to escape by saying that this ought not to be understood as applicable to every kind of doctrine;
for it will be impossible to find any doctrine but what has come from God that deserves the name
of pure and unleavened  Hence it follows that leaven is the name given to every foreign admixture;
as Paul also tells us that faith is rendered spurious, as soon as we are
drawn aside from the simplicity of Christ,
(2 Corinthians 11:3 .)
It must now be apparent who are the persons of whose doctrine our Lord charges us to beware.
The ordinary government of the Church was at that time in the hands of the scribes and priests,
among whom the Pharisees held the highest rank. As Christ expressly charges his followers to
beware of their doctrine, it follows that all who mingle their own inventions with the word of God,
or who advance any thing that does not belong to it, must be rejected, how honorable soever may
be their rank, or whatever proud titles they may wear. Accursed and rebellious, therefore, is the
obedience of those who voluntarily submit to the inventions and laws of the Pope.
Atheists . His subject naturally led him to treat with sportive humor the solenmities of death and the future judgment; and the wit
and elegance of his pen, had it been guided by ordinary caution, would have been readily — far too readily — sustained as an
apology for the tone of his work. But in defiance of the ordinary feelings of mankind, he attacked so fearlessly the most sacred
truths, and offended the ear of modesty by such indecent allusions, that his character as a man has been stamped with infamy.
Modern times have scarcely produced so daring an infidel, with the exception perhaps of Voltaire , who took no pains to conceal
his intense hatred of Christianity and of good men. Had he appeared earlier, his name might perhaps have been substituted for
that of Lucian , as the representative of his class. — Ed.
434 See page 127  of this volume.
174John Calvin Commentary on Matthew, Mark, Luke - Volume 2
