---
layout: reading-chapter
book_id: gospel_harmony
book_title: 加尔文福音书注释
author_id: calvin
author_name: 约翰·加尔文
section: "55"
section_title: "MATTHEW 17:1-8 ； MARK 9:2-8 ； LUKE 9:28-36"
header-img: psalm-bg-mountain.jpg
date: 2026-04-30 20:15
---

MATTHEW 17:1-8 ; MARK 9:2-8 ; LUKE 9:28-36
Luke 9:28-36 Mark 9:2-8 Matthew 17:1-8
28. And it happened about
eight days after these words, and2. And after six days Jesus
taketh Peter, and James, and1. And after six days Jesus
taketh Peter, and James, and
he took Peter, and James, and John, and leadeth them to a high John his brother, and leadeth
John, and went up to a mountain mountain apart by themselves, them to a high mountain apart;
to pray. 29. And while he was and was transfigured before 2. And was transfigured before
praying, the appearance of his them. 3. And his garments them: and his face shone as the
countenance was changed, and became shining, exceedingly sun, and his garments became
his raiment became white and white as snow, so white as no white as the light. 3. And, lo,
dazzling. 47530. And, lo, two fuller on earth could make them. there appeared to them 473 Moses
4. And there appeared to them and Elijah talking with him. men talked with him; who were
Elijah with Moses, and they 4. And Peter answering said to Moses and Elijah; 31. Who
were conversing with Jesus. Jesus, Lord, it is good for us to appeared in a majestic form, and
5. And Peter answering said to be here: if thou wilt, let us make spoke of the decease which he
Jesus, Rabbi, it is good for us to here three tabernacles; one for would accomplish at Jerusalem.
be here: and let us make three thee, and one for Moses, and one 32. And Peter, and they that
tabernacles; one for thee, and for Elijah. 5. While he was were with him, were
one for Moses, and one for speaking, lo, a bright cloud overpowered with sleep; and
Elijah. 6. For he knew not what overshadowed them; and, lo, a when they awoke, they saw his
he said; for they were terrified. voice out of the cloud, which glory, and the two men who
7. And there came a cloud that said, This is my beloved Son, in were with him. 33. And it
overshadowed them; and a voice whom I am well pleased; hear happened, while they were
came out of the cloud, saying, him. 6. And having heard this, departing from him, 476 Peter said
This is my beloved Son; hear the disciples fell on their face, 474to Jesus, Master, it is good for
him. 8. And suddenly, when they and were exceedingly afraid. us to be here: and let us make
looked around, they saw no 7. Then Jesus approaching three tabernacles; one for thee,
other person, but Jesus alone
with them.touched them, and said, Arise,
and be not afraid. 8. And whenand one for Moses, and one for
Elijah: not knowing what he
  they had lifted up their eyes,
they saw no man but Jesus only.said. 34. And while he was
speaking these words, a cloud
475 “Resplendissant comme un esclair ;” — “dazzling like lightning.”
473 “Et voyci, ils veirent Moyse et Elie parlans avec luy ;” — “and, lo, they saw Moses and Elijah talking with him.”
476 “Et adveint quarid ceux-la furent departis d’avec luy ;” — “and it happened when those men had departed from him.”
474 “Ce qu’ayant ouy les disciples cheurent sur leur face en terre ;” — “which the disciples having heard, fell on their face to
the earth.”
189John Calvin Commentary on Matthew, Mark, Luke - Volume 2
  came and overshadowed them;
and they were afraid as they
entered into the cloud. 35. And
a voice came out of the cloud,
saying, This is my beloved Son;
hear him. 36. And while the
voice was uttered, Jesus was
found alone.
 
Matthew 17:1 .And after six days.  We must first inquire for what purpose Christ clothed himself
with heavenly glory for a short time, and why he did not admit more than three of his disciples to
be spectators. Some think that he did so, in order to fortify them against the trial which they were
soon to meet with, arising from his death. That does not appear to me to be a probable reason; for
why should he have deprived the rest of the same remedy, or rather, why does he expressly forbid
them to make known what they had seen till after his resurrection, but because the result of the
vision would be later than his death? I have no doubt whatever that Christ intended to show that
he was not dragged unwillingly to death, but that he came forward of his own accord, to offer to
the Father the sacrifice of obedience. The disciples were not made aware of this till Christ rose;
nor was it even necessary that, at the very moment of his death, they should perceive the divine
power of Christ, so as to acknowledge it to be victorious on the cross; but the instruction which
they now received was intended to be useful at a future period both to themselves and to us, that
no man might take offense at the weakness of Christ, as if it were by force and necessity that he
had suffered. 477 It would manifestly have been quite as easy for Christ to protect his body from
death as to clothe it with heavenly glory.
We are thus taught that he was subjected to death, because he wished it to be so; that he was
crucified, because he offered himself. That same flesh, which was sacrificed on the cross and lay
in the grave, might have been exempted from death and the grave; for it had already partaken of
the heavenly glory. We are also taught that, so long as Christ remained in the world, bearing the
form of a servant, and so long as his majesty was concealed under the weakness of the flesh, nothing
had been taken from him, for it was of his own accord that he emptied himself , (Philippians 2:7 ;)
but now his resurrection has drawn aside that veil by which his power had been concealed for a
time.
Our Lord reckoned it enough to select three witnesses , because that is the number which the
Law has laid down for proving any thing;
at the mouth of two witnesses or three witnesses,
(Deuteronomy 17:6 .)
The difference as to time ought not to give us uneasiness. Matthew and Mark reckon six entire
days, which had elapsed between the events. Luke says that it happened about eight days afterwards ,
including both the day on which Christ spake these words, and the day  on which he was transfigured.
We see then that, under a diversity of expression, there is a perfect agreement as to the meaning.
477 “Comme si par force et contreinte il fust renu endurer la mort ;” — “as if by force and constraint he had come to suffer
death.”
190John Calvin Commentary on Matthew, Mark, Luke - Volume 2
2.And was transfigured before them.  Luke says that this happened while he was praying; and
from the circumstances of time and place, we may infer that he had prayed for what he now obtained,
that in the brightness of an unusual form his Godhead might become visible; not that he needed to
ask by prayer from another what he did not possess, or that he doubted his Father’s willingness,
but because, during the whole course of his humiliation, he always ascribed to the Father whatever
he did as a divine Person, and because he intended to excite us to prayer by his example.
His transfiguration did not altogether enable his disciples to see Christ, as he now is in heaven,
but gave them a taste of his boundless glory, such as they were able to comprehend. Then his face
shone as the sun; but now he is far beyond the sun in brightness. In his raiment an unusual and
dazzling whiteness appeared; but now without raiment a divine majesty shines in his whole body.
Thus in ancient times God appeared to the holy fathers, not as He was in Himself, but so far as they
could endure the rays of His infinite brightness; for John declares that not until
they are like him will they see him as he is, ( 1 John 3:2 .)
There is no necessity for entering here into ingenious inquiries as to the whiteness of his
garments , or the brightness  of his countenance; for this was not a complete exhibition of the
heavenly glory of Christ, but, under symbols which were adapted to the capacity of the flesh, he
enabled them to taste in part what could not be fully comprehended.
3.And, lo, there appeared to them Moses and Elijah.  It is asked, Were Moses and Elijah  actually
present? or was it only an apparition that was exhibited to the disciples, as the prophets frequently
beheld visions of things that were absent? Though the subject admits, as we say, of arguments on
both sides, yet I think it more probable that they were actually brought to that place. There is no
absurdity in this supposition; for God has bodies and souls in his hand, and can restore the dead to
life at his pleasure, whenever he sees it to be necessary. Moses and Elijah  did not then rise on their
own account, 478 but in order to wait upon Christ. It will next be asked, How came the apostles to
know Moses and Elijah , whom they had never seen? The answer is easy. God, who brought them
forward, gave also signs and tokens by which they were enabled to know them. It was thus by an
extraordinary revelation that they obtained the certain knowledge that they were Moses and Elijah
But why did these two appear rather than others who equally belonged to the company of the
holy fathers? It was intended to demonstrate that Christ alone is the end of the Law and of the
Prophets; and that single reason ought to satisfy us: for it was of the utmost importance to our faith
that Christ did not come into our world without a testimony, but with commendations which God
had formerly bestowed. I have no objection, however, to the reason which is commonly adduced,
that Elijah  was selected, in preference to others, as the representative of all the Prophets; because,
though he left nothing in writing, yet next to Moses he was the most distinguished of their number,
restored the worship of God which had been corrupted, and stood unrivaled in his exertions for
vindicating the Law and true godliness, which was at that time almost extinct.
And they conversed with Jesus.  When they appeared  along with Christ, and held conversation
with him, this was a declaration of their being agreed. The subject on which they conversed is stated
by Luke only: they talked of the decease  which awaited Christ at Jerusalem  This must not be
understood to refer to them as private individuals, but rather to the commission which they had
formerly received. Though it was now a long time since they had died and finished the course of
478 “Moise et Elie ne sont pas lors ressuscitez pour eux, et pour le regard de la resurrection derniere ;” — “Moses and Elijah
did not then rise for themselves, and with respect to the last resurrection.”
191John Calvin Commentary on Matthew, Mark, Luke - Volume 2
their calling, yet our Lord intended once more to ratify by their voice what they had taught during
their life, in order to inform us that the same salvation, through the sacrifice of Christ, is held out
to us in common with the holy fathers. At the time when the ancient prophets uttered their predictions
concerning the death of Christ, he himself, who was the eternal wisdom of God, was sitting on the
invisible throne of his glory. Hence it follows that, when he was clothed in flesh, he was not liable
to death any farther than as he submitted to it of his own free will.
4.Lord, it is good for us to be here.  Luke tells us that Peter uttered these words while Moses
and Elijah were departing;  and hence we infer that he was afraid lest, at their departure, that pleasant
and delightful exhibition should vanish away. We need not wonder that Peter was so captivated by
the loveliness of what he beheld, as to lose sight of every other person, and rest satisfied with the
mere enjoyment of it; as it is said in the psalm,
In thy presence is fulnessess of joy, ( Psalm 16:11 .)
But his desire was foolish; first, because he did not comprehend the design of the vision;
secondly, because he absurdly put the servants on a level with their Lord; and, thirdly, he was
mistaken in proposing to build fading tabernacles 479 for men who had been already admitted to the
glory of heaven and of the angels.
I have said that he did not understand the design of the vision; for, while he was hearing, from
the mouth of Moses and Elijah , that the time of Christ’s death was at hand, he foolishly dreamed
that his present aspect, which was temporary, would endure for ever. And what if the kingdom of
Christ had been confined in this way to the narrow limits of twenty or thirty feet? Where would
have been the redemption of the whole world? Where would have been the communication of
eternal salvation? It was also highly absurd to conceive of Moses and Elijah  as companions of the
Son of God, as if it had not been proper that all should be reduced to a lower rank, that he alone
may have the pre-eminence. And if Peter is satisfied with his present condition, why does he suppose
that earthly supports were needed by those persons, the very sight of whom, he imagined, was
enough to make him happy?
Justly, therefore, is it stated by two of the Evangelists, that he knew not what he said; and Mark
assigns the reason, that they were afraid; for God did not intend that the apostles should, at that
time, derive any advantage from it beyond that of beholding for a moment, as in a bright mirror,
the divinity of his Son. At a later period, he pointed out to them the fruit of the vision, and corrected
the error of their judgment. What is stated by Mark must therefore mean, that Peter was carried
away by frenzy, and spoke like a man who had lost his senses.
5. Lo, a bright cloud overshadowed them.  Their eyes were covered by a cloud , in order to inform
them, that they were not yet prepared for beholding the brightness of the heavenly glory. For, when
the Lord gave tokens of his presence, he employed, at the same time, some coverings to restrain
the arrogance of the human mind. So now, with the view of teaching his disciples a lesson of
humility, he withdraws from their eyes the sight of the heavenly glory. This admonition is likewise
addressed to us, that we may not seek to pry into the secrets which lie beyond our senses, but, on
the contrary, that every man may keep within the limits of sobriety, according to the measure of
his faith. In a word, this cloud ought to serve us as a bridle, that our curiosity may not indulge in
undue wantonness. The disciples, too, were warned that they must return to their former warfare,
and therefore must not expect a triumph before the time.
479 “Des tabernacles terriens ;” — “earthly tabernacles.”
192John Calvin Commentary on Matthew, Mark, Luke - Volume 2
And, lo, a voice from the cloud.  It deserves our attention, that the voice of God was heard from
the cloud , but that neither a body nor a face was seen. Let us therefore remember the warning which
Moses gives us, that God has no visible shape, lest we should deceive ourselves by imagining that
He resembled a man, ( Deuteronomy 4:15 .) There were, no doubt, various appearances under which
God made himself known to the holy fathers in ancient times; but in all cases he refrained from
using signs which might induce them to make for themselves idols. And certainly, as the minds of
men are too strongly inclined to foolish imaginations, there was no necessity for throwing oil upon
the flame. 480 This manifestation of the glory of God was remarkable above all others. When he
makes a cloud to pass between Him and us, and invites us to himself by His voice, what madness
is it to attempt to place Him before our eyes by a block of wood or of stone? Let us therefore
endeavor to enter by faith alone, and not by the eyes of flesh, into that inaccessible light in which
God dwells. The voice  came from the cloud , that the disciples, knowing it to have proceeded from
God, might receive it with due reverence.
This is my beloved Son.  I willingly concur with those who think that there is an implied contrast
of Moses and Elijah  with Christ, and that the disciples of God’s own Son are here charged to seek
no other teacher. The word Son is emphatic, and raises him above servants. There are two titles
here bestowed upon Christ, which are not more fitted to do honor to him than to aid our faith: a
beloved Son , and a Master. The Father calls him my beloved Son, in whom I am well pleased , and
thus declares him to be the Mediator, by whom he reconciles the world to himself. When he enjoins
us to hear him , he appoints him to be the supreme and only teacher of his Church. It was his design
to distinguish Christ from all the rest, as we truly and strictly infer from those words, that by nature
he was God’s only Son  In like manner, we learn that he alone is beloved by the Father, and that he
alone is appointed to be our Teacher, that in him all authority may dwell.
But it will perhaps be objected, Does not God love angels and men? It is easy to reply, that the
fatherly love of God, which is spread over angels and men, proceeds from him as its source. The
Son is beloved  by the Father, not so as to make other creatures the objects of his hatred, but so that
he communicates to them what belongs to himself. There is a difference, no doubt, between our
condition and that of the angels; for they never were alienated from God, and therefore needed not
that he should reconcile them; while we are enemies on account of sin, till Christ procure for us
his favor. Still, it is a fixed principle that God is gracious to both, only so far as he embraces us in
Christ; for even the angels would not be firmly united to God if Christ were not their Head. It may
also be observed that, since the Father here speaks of himself as different from the Son, there is a
distinction of persons; for they are one in essence and alike in glory.
Hear him.  I mentioned a little ago, that these words were intended to draw the attention of the
Church to Christ as the only Teacher, that on his mouth alone it may depend. For, though Christ
came to maintain the authority of the Law and the Prophets ,(Matthew 5:17 ,) yet he holds the
highest rank, so that, by the brightness of his gospel, he causes those sparks which shone in the Old
Testament to disappear. He is the Sun of righteousness,  whose arrival brought the full light of day.
And this is the reason why the Apostle says ( Hebrews 1:1 ) that
God, who at sundry times and in various ways spoke formerly by the Prophets, hath in these last
days spoken to us by his beloved Son.
480 “Il n’estoit ia besoin de ietter de l’huile au feu pour enflamber davantage le mal ;” — “there was no necessity for throwing
oil on the fire to inflame the evil still more.”
193John Calvin Commentary on Matthew, Mark, Luke - Volume 2
In short, Christ is as truly heard at the present day in the Law and in the Prophets as in his
Gospel; so that in him dwells the authority of a Master , which he claims for himself alone, saying,
One is your Master , even Christ , (Matthew 23:8 .) But his authority is not fully acknowledged,
unless all the tongues of men are silent. If we would submit to his doctrine, all that has been invented
by men must be thrown down and destroyed. He is every day, no doubt, sending out teachers, but
it is to state purely and honestly what they have learned from him, and not to corrupt the gospel by
their own additions. In a word, no man can be regarded a faithful teacher of the Church, unless he
be himself a disciple of Christ, and bring others to be taught by him.
6.And having heard this  God intended that the disciples should be struck with this terror, in
order to impress more fully on their hearts the remembrance of the vision. Yet we see how great
is the weakness of our nature, which trembles in this manner at hearing the voice of God. If ungodly
men mock at God, or despise him without concern, it is because God does not address them so as
to cause his presence to be felt; but the majesty of God, as soon as we perceive him, must
unavoidably cast us down.
7.Then Jesus approaching touched them.  Christ raises them up when they had fallen, and by
so doing performs his office; for he came down to us for this very purpose, that by his guidance
believers might boldly enter into the presence of God, and that his majesty, which otherwise would
swallow up all flesh, might no longer fill them with terror. Nor is it only by his words that he
comforts, but by touching also that he encourages them.
8.They saw no man but Jesus only.  When it is said that in the end they saw Christ alone , this
means that the Law and the Prophets had a temporary glory, that Christ alone might remain fully
in view. If we would properly avail ourselves of the aid of Moses, we must not stop with him, but
must endeavor to be conducted by his hand to Christ, of whom both he and all the rest are ministers.
This passage may also be applied to condemn the superstitions of those who confound Christ not
only with prophets and apostles, but with saints of the lowest rank, in such a manner as to make
him nothing more than one of their number. But when the saints of God are eminent in graces, it
is for a totally different purpose than that they should defraud Christ of a part of his honor, and
appropriate it to themselves. In the disciples themselves we may see the origin of the mistake; for
so long as they were terrified by the majesty of God, their minds wandered in search of men, but
when Christ gently raised them up, they saw him alone  If we are made to experience that consolation
by which Christ relieves us of our fears, all those foolish affections, which distract us on every
hand, will vanish away.
