---
layout: reading-chapter
book_id: gospel_harmony
book_title: 加尔文福音书注释
author_id: calvin
author_name: 约翰·加尔文
section: "56"
section_title: "MATTHEW 17:9-13 ； MARK9:9-13； LUKE 9:36"
header-img: psalm-bg-mountain.jpg
date: 2026-04-30 20:15
---

MATTHEW 17:9-13 ; MARK9:9-13; LUKE 9:36
Luke 9:36 Mark 9:9-13 Matthew 17:9-13
36. And they kept silence,
and told no man in those days9. And when they were
going down from the mountain,9. And as they were going
down from the mountain, Jesus
any of those things which they
had seen.he charged them not to tell any
man those things which they hadcommanded them, saying, Tell
the vision to no man, till the Son
  seen, till the Son of man had of man be risen from the dead.
194John Calvin Commentary on Matthew, Mark, Luke - Volume 2
risen from the dead. 10. And
they kept this saying among10. And his disciples asked him,
saying, Why then do the scribes
themselves, disputing with each say that Elijah must come first?
other what was the meaning of 11. And Jesus answering said to
the expression which he had them, Elijah indeed will come
used, To rise from the dead. 11 first, and restore all things.
And they asked him, saying, 12. But I say to you, That Elijah
Why do the scribes say that is come already, and they did not
Elijah must come first? 12. And know him, but have done to him
he answering said to them, whatever they pleased: thus also
Elijah indeed will come first, will the Son of man suffer from
and restore all things; and, as it them. 13. Then the disciples
is written, the Son of man must understood that he had spoken
suffer many things and be to them concerning John the
Baptist. 481despised. 13. But I say to you,
  That Elijah is come, and they
have done to him whatever they
pleased, as it is written of him.
 
Matthew 17:9 .And as they were going down from the mountain.  We have said that the time
for making known the vision was not yet fully come; and, indeed, the disciples would not have
believed it, if Christ had not given a more striking proof of his glory in his resurrection. But after
that his divine power had been openly displayed, that temporary exhibition of his glory began to
be admitted, so as to make it fully evident that, even during the time that he emptied himself ,
(Philippians 2:7 ,) he continued to retain his divinity entire, though it was concealed under the veil
of the flesh. There are good reasons, therefore, why he enjoins his disciples to keep silence, till he
be risen from the dead.
10.And his disciples asked him, saying.  No sooner is the resurrection mentioned than the
disciples imagine that the reign of Christ is commenced; 482 for they explain this word to mean that
the world would acknowledge him to be the Messiah. That they imagined the resurrection to be
something totally different from what Christ meant, is evident from what is stated by Mark, that
they disputed with each other what was the meaning of that expression which he had used, To rise
from the dead  Perhaps, too, they were already under the influence of that dream which is now held
as an undoubted oracle among the Rabbins, that there would be a first and a second coming of the
Messiah; that in the first he would be mean and despised, but that this would be shortly afterwards
followed by his royal dignity. And, indeed, there is some plausibility in that error, for it springs
from a true principle. The Scripture, too, speaks of a first and a second coming of the Messiah; for
481 “Que c’estoit de Iean Baptiste qu’il leur avoit parle ;” — “that it was of John the Baptist that he had spoken to them.”
482 “Ils imaginent que c’est l’entree du regne de Christ, et leur semble qu’ils y sont desia ;” — “they imagine that it is the
commencement of the kingdom of Christ, and think that they are already in it.”
195John Calvin Commentary on Matthew, Mark, Luke - Volume 2
it promises that he will be a Redeemer, to expiate by his sacrifice the sins of the world 483 And such
is the import of the following prophecies:
Rejoice, daughter of Zion, behold, thy King cometh, poor, sitting on an ass,
(Zechariah 9:9 .)
We beheld him, and he had no form or beauty, and he resembled a leper, so that we had no esteem
for him,
(Isaiah 53:3,4 .)
Again, Scripture represents him as victorious over death, and as subjecting all things to his
dominion. But we see how the Rabbins corrupt the pure word of God by their inventions; and as
every thing was greatly corrupted in the time of our Lord, it is probable that the people had also
embraced this foolish notion.
Why do the scribes say that Elijah must come first?  The gross mistakes which they committed
as to the person of Elijah have been pointed out on two or three occasions. 484 Perhaps, too, they
cunningly and wickedly endeavored to lessen the authority of Christ by bringing forward Elijah;
for as it had been promised that Elijah would come as the forerunner of Messiah, to prepare the
way before him , (Malachi 3:1; 4:5 ,) it was easy to excite a prejudice against Christ, by saying that
he came unaccompanied by Elijah  By a trick closely resembling this, the devil enchants the Papists
of the present day not to expect the day of judgment till Elijah and Enoch have appeared. 485 It may
not usually be conjectured that this expedient was purposely resorted to by the scribes, in order to
represent Christ as unworthy of confidence, because he wanted the legitimate badge of the Messiah.
11. Elijah indeed will come first. We have stated elsewhere the origin of that error which
prevailed among the Jews. As John the Baptist was to resemble Elijah  by restoring the fallen
condition of the Church, the prophet Malachi ( 4:5,6 ) had even given to him the name of Elijah;
and this had been rashly interpreted by the scribes, as if Elijah the Tishbite (1 Kings 17:1 ) were to
return a second time to the world. Christ now declares that every thing which Malachi uttered was
true, but that his prediction had been misunderstood and distorted from its true meaning. “The
promise,” says he, “that Eliah would come was true, and has been already fulfilled; but the scribes
have already rejected Elijah, whose name they idly and falsely plead in opposing me.”
And will restore all things.  This does not mean that John the Baptist restored them perfectly,
but that he conveyed and handed them over to Christ, who would complete the work which he had
begun. Now as the scribes had shamefully rejected John, Christ reminds his disciples that the
impostures of such men ought not to give them uneasiness, and that it ought not to be reckoned
strange, if, after having rejected the servant, they should, with equal disdain, reject his Master. And
that no one might be distressed by a proceeding so strange, our Lord mentions that the Scripture
contained predictions of both events, that the Redeemer of the world, and Elijah his forerunner,
would be rejected by false and wicked teachers.
483 “Faisant par son sacrifice satisfaction pour les pechez du monde ;” — “making satisfaction by his sacrifice for the sins of
the world.”
484 Among other passages in which our Author has treated of the erroneous notions entertained by the Jews respecting Elijah ,
the reader may consult his Commentary on John 1:21, 25. — Ed.
485 “Iusques a ce qu’on voye Elie et Henoch retourner en ce monde ;” — “till Elijah and Enoch are seen returning to this world.”
196John Calvin Commentary on Matthew, Mark, Luke - Volume 2
