---
layout: reading-chapter
book_id: gospel_harmony
book_title: 加尔文福音书注释
author_id: calvin
author_name: 约翰·加尔文
section: "57"
section_title: "LUKE 9:37-43"
header-img: psalm-bg-mountain.jpg
date: 2026-04-30 20:15
---

LUKE 9:37-43
Luke 9:37-43 Mark 9:14-27 Matthew 17:14-18
37. And it happened on the
following day, while they were14. And when he came to the
disciples, he saw a great14. And when they were
come to the multitude, a man
going down from the mountain, multitude around them, and the came to him, kneeling before
a great multitude met him. scribes disputing with them. him, 15. And saying, Lord, have
38. And, lo, a man, who was one 15. And the whole multitude, as compassion on my son, for he is
of the multitude, cried out, soon as they saw him, were lunatic, and is grievously
saying, Master, I beseech thee, astonished, and, running to him, distressed; for frequently he
look to my son; for he is my saluted him. 16. And he asked falleth into the fire, and
only son. 39. And, lo, a spirit the scribes, What do you dispute frequently into the water.
seizeth him, and teareth him among yourselves? 17. And one 16. And I brought him to thy
foaming, and bruising him, of the multitude answering said, disciples, and they could not
hardly departeth from him. Master, I have brought to thee cure him. 17. And Jesus
40. And I besought thy disciples my son, who hath a dumb spirit; answering said, O unbelieving
to cast him out, and they could 18. And wheresoever it seizeth and perverse nation, how long
not. 41. And Jesus answering him, it teareth him, and he shall I be with you? How long
said, O unbelieving and perverse foameth, and gnasheth with his shall I suffer you? Bring him
nation, how long shall I be with teeth, and languished: and I hither to me. 18. And Jesus
you, and suffer you? Bring thy spoke to thy disciples to cast him rebuked the devil, who went out
son hither. 42. And while he was out, and they could not. 19. And of him; and from that instant the
child was cured. still approaching, the devil tore he, answering, saith to him, O
  him, and threw him down; and unbelieving nation, how long
Jesus rebuked the unclean spirit, shall I be with you? How long
and cured the child, and restored shall I suffer you? Bring him to
him to his father. 43. And they me. 20. And they brought him
were all astonished at the mighty
power of God.to him; and as soon as he saw
him, the spirit tore him, and he
  lay on the ground, and rolled
about, foaming. 21. And he
asked hi father, How long is it
since this happened to him? And
he said, From a child. 22. And
frequently it hath thrown him
into the fire, and into the water,
to destroy him: but if thou canst
do any thing, have compassion
on us, and help us. 23. And Jesus
said, If thou canst believe it, all
things are possible to him that
197John Calvin Commentary on Matthew, Mark, Luke - Volume 2
believeth. 24. And immediately
the father of the child,
exclaiming with tears, said,
Lord, I believe; aid thou my
unbelief. 25. And when Jesus
saw that the multitude were
crowding upon him, he rebuked
the unclean spirit, saying to him,
Dumb and deaf spirit, I
command thee, go out of him,
and enter no more into him.
26. And when the spirit had
cried out, and torn him greatly,
he went out of him; and he
became like a dead person, so
that many said, He is dead.
27. But Jesus stretched out his
hand, and raised him; and he
stood up.
 
As Mark is more full, and explains the circumstances very minutely, we shall follow the order
of his narrative. And first he points out clearly the reason why Christ uses a harshness so unusual
with him, when he exclaims that the Jews, on account of their perverse malice, do not deserve to
be any longer endured. We know how gently he was wont to receive them, even when their requests
were excessively importunate. 486 A father here entreats in behalf of an only son, the necessity is
extremely urgent, and a modest and humble appeal is made to the compassion of Christ. Why then
does he, contrary to his custom, break out suddenly into passion, and declare that they can be
endured no longer? As the narrative of Matthew and Luke does not enable us to discover the reason
of this great severity, some commentators have fallen into the mistake of supposing that this rebuke
was directed either against the disciples, or against the father of the afflicted child. But if we duly
consider all the circumstances of the case, as they are related by Mark, there will be no difficulty
in arriving at the conclusion, that the indignation of Christ was directed against the malice of the
scribes, and that he did not intend to treat the ignorant and weak with such harshness.
During Christ’s absence, a lunatic  child had been brought forward. The scribes, regarding this
as a plausible occasion for giving annoyance, seized upon it eagerly, and entreated the disciples
that, if they had any power, they would exercise it in curing the child. It is probable that the disciples
made an attempt, and that their efforts were unavailing; upon which the scribes raise the shout of
victory, and not only ridicule the disciples, but break out against Christ, as if in their person his
power had been baffled. It was an extraordinary display of outrageous impiety united with equally
base ingratitude, maliciously to keep out of view so many miracles, from which they had learned
486 “Encores mesme qu’ils se monstrassent import uns et facheux en leurs requestes ;” — “even though they showed themselves
to be importunate and troublesome in their requests.”
198John Calvin Commentary on Matthew, Mark, Luke - Volume 2
the amazing power of Christ; for they manifestly endeavored to extinguish the light which was
placed before their eyes. With good reason, therefore, does Christ exclaim that they could no longer
be endured, and pronounce them to be an unbelieving and perverse nation; for the numerous proofs
which they had formerly beheld ought at least to have had the effect of preventing them from
seeking occasion of disparagement. 487
Mark 9:14 . He saw a great multitude around them.  The disciples were, no doubt, held up to
public gaze, as the enemies of the truth are wont, on occasions of triumph, to assemble a crowd
about a trifle. The scribes had made such a noise about it, as to draw down on the disciples the
ridicule of many persons. And yet it appears that there were some who were not ill disposed; for,
as soon as they see Jesus, they salute him; and even the insolence of the scribes is restrained by his
presence, for, when they are asked what is the matter in dispute, they have not a word to say.
17. Master, I have brought to thee my son.  Matthew describes a different sort of disease from
what is described by Mark, for he says that the man was lunatic But both agree as to these two
points, that he was dumb , and that at certain intervals he became furious. The term lunatic  is applied
to those who, about the waning of the moon , are seized with epilepsy, or afflicted with giddiness.
I do not admit the fanciful notion of Chrysostom, that the word lunatic  was invented by a trick of
Satan, in order to throw disgrace on the good creatures of God; for we learn from undoubted
experience, that the course of the moon affects the increase or decline of these diseases. 488 And yet
this does not prevent Satan from mixing up his attacks with natural means. I am of opinion, therefore,
that the man was not naturally deaf and dumb , but that Satan had taken possession of his tongue
and ears; and that, as the weakness of his brain and nerves made him liable to epilepsy, Satan availed
himself of this for aggravating the disease. The consequence was, that he was exposed to danger
on every hand, and was thrown into violent convulsions, which left him lying on the ground, in a
fainting state, and like a dead man.
Let us learn from this how many ways Satan has of injuring us, were it not that he is restrained
by the hand of God. Our infirmities both of soul and body, which we feel to be innumerable, are
so many darts with which Satan is supplied for wounding us. We are worse than stupid, if a condition
so wretched does not, arouse us to prayer. But in this we see also an amazing display of the goodness
of God, that, though we are liable to such a variety of dangers, 489 he surrounds us with his protection;
particularly if we consider with what eagerness our enemy is bent on our destruction. We ought
also to call to remembrance the consoling truth, that Christ has come to bridle his rage, and that
we are safe in the midst of so many dangers, because our diseases are effectually counteracted by
heavenly medicine.
We must attend also to the circumstance of the time. The father replies, that his son had been
subject to this grievous disease from his infancy . If Satan was permitted to exert his power, to such
an extent, on a person of that tender age, what reason have not we to fear, who are continually
exposing ourselves by our crimes to deadly strokes, who even supply our enemy with darts, and
487 “Qu’ils n’allassent plus chercher des cavillations et moyens obliques pour luy resister ;” — “not to resort any more to cavils
and indirect methods of opposing him.”
488 On the opinion expressed by calvin, as to the influence of the moon on these diseases, the reader may consult Harmony ,
vol. 1 p. 245, n.l.  — Ed.
489 “Combien que nous soyons subiets a mille dangers et inconveniens ;” — “though we are liable to a thousand dangers and
inconveniences.”
199John Calvin Commentary on Matthew, Mark, Luke - Volume 2
on whom he might justly be permitted to spend his rage, if it were not kept under restraint by the
astonishing goodness of God?
Matthew 17:17 . O unbelieving and rebellious nation.  Though Christ appears to direct his
discourse to the father of the lunatic , yet there can be no doubt that he refers to the scribes, as I
have lately explained; for it is certain that the reproof is directed, not against ignorant and weak
persons, but against those who, through inveterate malice, obstinately resist God. This is the reason
why Christ declares that they are no longer worthy to be endured, and threatens that ere long he
will separate from them. But nothing worse could happen to them than that Christ should leave
them, and it was no light reproach that they rejected so disdainfully the grace of their visitation.
We must also observe here, that we ought to treat men in various ways, each according to his natural
disposition. For, while our Lord attracts to him the teachable by the utmost mildness, supports the
weak, and gently arouses even the sluggish, he does not spare those crooked serpents, on whom he
perceives that no remedies can effect a cure.
Mark 9:20 .And as soon as he saw him.  That the devil should rage with more than ordinary
cruelty against the man, when he is brought to Christ, ought not to excite surprise; for in proportion
as the grace of Christ is seen to be nearer at hand, and acts more powerfully, the fury of Satan is
the more highly excited. The presence of Christ awakens him like the sound of a trumpet. He raises
as violent a storm as he can, and contends with all his might. We ought to be prepared beforehand
with such meditations, that our faith may not be disturbed, when the approach of the grace of Christ
is met by more than ordinary violence on the part of our enemy. Nor ought we to lose sight of
another point, that the true commencement of our cure is, when our affliction is so heavy that we
are almost at the point of death. It must also be taken into account that, by means of the furious
attack of Satan, our Lord lights a torch to cause his grace to be seen; for, when the spectators were
appalled at the dreadful spectacle, the display of the power of Christ, which immediately followed,
was more distinctly perceived.
21. From a child.  Hence we infer that this punishment was not inflicted on account of the sins
of the individual, but was a secret judgment of God. True indeed, even infants, as soon as they have
come out of the womb, are not innocent in the sight of God, or free from guilt; but God’s
chastisements have sometimes hidden causes, and are intended to try our obedience. We do not
render to God the honor which is due to Him, unless with reverence and modesty we adore His
justice, when it is concealed from us. Whoever wishes to obtain more full information on this point,
may consult my Commentary on these words, Neither hath this man sinned , nor his parents , (John
9:3.)
22. If thou canst do any thing, have compassion on us, and help us.  We see how little honor he
renders to Christ; for, supposing him to be some prophet, whose power was limited, he approaches
to him with hesitation. On the other hand, the first foundation of faith is, to embrace the boundless
power of God; and the first step to prayer is, to raise it above all opposition by the firm belief that
our prayers are not in vain. As this man did not suppose Christ to be at all different from other men,
his false opinion is corrected; for our faith must be so formed as to be capable and prepared for
receiving the desired favor. In his reply Christ does not administer a direct reproof, but indirectly
reminding the man of what he had said amiss, points out to him his fault, and informs him how a
remedy may be obtained.
23. If thou canst believe.  “You ask me,” says he, “to aid you as far as I can; but you will find
in me an inexhaustible fountain of power, provided that the faith which you bring be sufficiently
200John Calvin Commentary on Matthew, Mark, Luke - Volume 2
large.” Hence may be learned a useful doctrine, which will apply equally to all of us, that it is not
the Lord that prevents his benefits from flowing to us in large abundance, but that it must be
attributed to the narrowness of our faith, that it comes to us only in drops, and that frequently we
do not feel even a drop, because unbelief shuts up our heart. It is an idle exercise of ingenuity to
prove Christ’s meaning to be, that a man can believe of himself: for nothing more was intended
than to throw back on men the blame of their poverty, whenever they disparage the power of God
by their unbelief.
All things are possible to him that believeth.  Christ undoubtedly intended to teach that the
fullness of all blessings has been given to us by the Father, and that every kind of assistance must
be expected from him alone in the same manner as we expect it from the hand of God. “Only
exercise,” says he, “a firm belief, and you will obtain.” In what manner faith obtains any thing for
us we shall immediately see.
24. Lord, I believe.  He declares that he believes , and yet acknowledges himself to have unbelief
These two statements may appear to contradict each other, but there is none of us that does not
experience both of them in himself. As our faith is never perfect, it follows that we are partly
unbelievers; but God forgives us, and exercises such forbearance towards us, as to reckon us
believers on account of a small portion of faith. It is our duty, in the meantime, carefully to shake
off the remains of infidelity which adhere to us, to strive against them, and to pray to God to correct
them, and, as often as we are engaged in this conflict, to fly to him for aid. If we duly inquire what
portion has been bestowed on each, it will evidently appear that there are very few who are eminent
in faith, few who have a moderate portion, and very many who have but a small measure.
