---
layout: reading-chapter
book_id: gospel_harmony
book_title: 加尔文福音书注释
author_id: calvin
author_name: 约翰·加尔文
section: "6"
section_title: "MATTHEW 11:20-24； LUKE 10:13-16"
header-img: psalm-bg-mountain.jpg
date: 2026-04-30 20:15
---

MATTHEW 11:20-24; LUKE 10:13-16
Luke 10:13-16 Matthew 11:20-24
32 Harmony, volume 1 p. 421 .
33 “Et leur commande d’aller alaigrement et en diligence, a fin que bien tost ils ayent fait une course par tout le pays de Iudee ;”
— “and commands them to go with alacrity and diligence, that they may soon have performed a circuit through the whole country
of Judea.”
34 “Si inhumains et mal-gracieux ;” — “so barbarous and uncivil.”
35 “A fin que les disciples ne facent conscience d’aucune sorte de viande ;” — “in order that the disciples may not make
conscience of any kind of food.”
14John Calvin Commentary on Matthew, Mark, Luke - Volume 2
13. Woe to thee, Chorazin! woe to thee,
Bethsaida! for if the might works, which have20. Then he began to upbraid the cities, in
which most of his mighty works were done,
been done in you, had been done in Tyre and because they had not repented of crimes: 21. Woe
Sidon, they would have long ago repented, sitting to thee, Chorazin! woe to thee, Bethsaida! for if
in sackcloth and ashes. 14. But it will be more the mighty works, which have been done in you,
tolerable for Tyre and Sidon in the judgment than had been done in Tyre and Sidon, they would
for you. 3815. And thou, Capernaum, which art have repented of their crimes long ago in
sackcloth and ashes. 22. But I say to you, It will exalted even to heaven, shall be cast down even
be more tolerable for Tyre and Sidon 36 in the day to hell. 16. He that heareth you heareth me; and
he that despiseth you despiseth me; and he that
despiseth me despiseth him that sent me.of judgment than for you. 23. And thou,
Capernaum, which art exalted even to heaven
  shall be cast down even to hell; for if the mighty
works, which have been done in thee, had been
done in Sodom, it would have remained until this
day. 24. But I say to you, That it will be more
tolerable for the land of Sodom 37 in the day of
judgment than for thee.
 
 
Matthew 11:20 .Then he began to upbraid.  Luke states the time when, and the reason why,
Christ uttered such invectives against those cities. It was while he was sending the disciples away
into various parts of Judea, to proclaim, as they passed along, that the kingdom of God was at hand.
Reflecting on the ingratitude of those among whom he had long discharged the office of a prophet,
and performed many wonderful works, without any good result, he broke out into these words,
announcing that the time was now come, when he should depart to other cities, having learned, by
experience, that the inhabitants of the country adjoining that lake, among whom he had begun to
preach the Gospel and perform miracles, were full of obstinacy and of desperate malice. But he
says nothing about the doctrine, and reproaches them that his miracles had not led them to repent.
39 The object which our Lord had in view, in exhibiting those manifestations of his power,
undoubtedly was to invite men to himself; but as all are by nature averse to him, it is necessary to
begin with repentance. Chorazin  and Bethsaida  are well known to have been cities which were
situated on the lake of Gennesareth.
21.If those mighty works had been done in Tyre and Sidon.  As Tyre and Sidon, in consequence
of their proximity, were at that time abhorred for their ungodliness, pride, debauchery, and other
vices, Christ employs this comparison for the express purpose of making a deeper and more painful
impression on his Jewish countrymen. There was not one of them who did not look upon the
inhabitants of Tyre and Sidon  as abominable despisers of God. It is, therefore, no small heightening
38 “Pourtant Tyr et Sidon seront plus doucement traittez au Iugementque vous ;” — “therefore Tyre and Sidon will be more
gently treated in the Judgment than you.”
36 “Que Tyr et Sidon seront plus doucement traittez ;” — “that Tyre and Sidon will be treated more gently.”
37 “Que ceux de Sodome seront traittez plus doucement ;” — “that those of Sodom will be treated more gently.”
39 “Que par les miracles ils n’ont point esmeus pour se convertir a repentance ;” — “that by the miracles they were not moved
to be converted to repentance.”
15John Calvin Commentary on Matthew, Mark, Luke - Volume 2
of his curse, when Christ says, that there would have been more hope of reformation from those
places in which there was no religion, than is to be seen in Judea itself.
Lest any should raise thorny questions 40 about the secret decrees of God, we must remember,
that this discourse of our Lord is accommodated to the ordinary capacity of the human mind. 41
Comparing the citizens of Bethsaida, and their neighbors, with the inhabitants of Tyre and Sidon,
he reasons, not of what God foresaw would be done either by the one or by the other, but of what
both parties would have done, so far as could be judged from the facts. The exceedingly corrupt
morals and unrestrained debauchery of those cities might be ascribed to ignorance; for there the
voice of God had never been heard, nor had miracles been performed, to warn them to repent. But
in the cities of Galilee, which Christ upbraids, there was a display of very hardened obstinacy in
despising miracles, of which they had seen a vast number without reaping any advantage. In short,
the words of Christ convey nothing more than that the inhabitants of Chorazin  and Bethsaida  go
beyond those of Tyre and Sidon  in malice and incurable contempt of God.
And yet we have no right to contend with God, for having passed by others of whom better
hopes might have been entertained, and displaying his power before some who were extremely
wicked and altogether desperate. Those on whom he does not bestow his mercy are justly appointed
to perdition. If he withhold his word from some, and allow them to perish, while, in order to render
others more inexcusable, he entreats and exhorts them, in a variety of ways, to repentance, who
shall charge him, on this account, with injustice? Let us, therefore, aware of our own weakness,
learn to contemplate this height and depth 42 with reverence; for it is intolerable fretfulness and
pride that is manifested by those who cannot endure to ascribe praise to the righteousness of God,
except so far as it comes within the reach of their senses, and who disdainfully reject those mysteries,
which it was their duty to adore, simply because the reason of them is not fully evident.
If the mighty works had been done.  We have said that these words inform us concerning the
right use of miracles, though they likewise include doctrine; for Christ did not remain silent, 43
while he was holding out to their view the power of the Father; but, on the contrary, miracles were
added to the Gospel, that they might attend to what was spoken by Christ.
In sackcloth and ashes Repentance  is here described by outward signs, the use of which was
at that time common in the Church of God: not that Christ attaches importance to that matter, but
because he accommodates himself to the capacity of the common people. We know that believers
are not only required to exercise repentance for a few days, but to cherish it incessantly till death.
But there is no necessity, in the present day, for being clothed with sackcloth, and sprinkled with
ashes ; and, therefore, there is not always occasion for that outward profession of repentance, but
only when, after some aggravated revolt, men turn to God. Sackcloth and ashes are, no doubt,
indications of guilt, for the purpose of turning away the wrath of the Judge; 44 and therefore relate
strictly to the beginning of conversion. But as men testify by this ceremony their sorrow and grief,
it must be preceded by hatred of sin, fear of God, and mortification of the flesh, according to the
words of Joel, ( 2:13,) Rend your hearts and not your garments. We now see the reason why sackcloth
40 “Des questions curieuses et difficiles ;” — “curious and difficult questions.”
41 “A la capacite et apprehension commune de l’entendement humain ;” — “to the ordinary capacity and apprehension of the
human understanding.”
42 “Ceste hautesse et profondeur des iugemens de Dieu ;” — “this height and depth of the judgments of God.”
43 “N’a pas eu cependant sa bouche close ;” — “did not in the meantime keep his mouth shut.”
44 “A fin d’adoucir le Iuge, et destourner son iuste courroux ;” — “in order to pacify the Judge, and to turn away his just wrath.”
16John Calvin Commentary on Matthew, Mark, Luke - Volume 2
and ashes  are mentioned by Christ along with repentance, when he speaks of Tyre and Sidon, to
the inhabitants of which the Gospel could not have been preached, without condemning their past
life, leaving nothing for them, but to betake themselves to the wretched apparel of criminals for
the sake of humbly beseeching pardon. Such, too, is the reference of the word sitting, which is
employed by Luke, Sitting in sackcloth and ashes; for it denotes “lying prostrate on the ground,”—a
posture adapted to express the grief of wretched persons, as is evident from many passages of the
Prophets.
23.And thou, Capernaum.  He expressly addresses the city of Capernaum, in which he had
resided so constantly, that many supposed it to be his native place. It was indeed an inestimable
honor, that the Son of God, when about to commence his reign and priesthood, had chosen
Capernaum  for the seat of his palace and sanctuary. And yet it was as deeply plunged in its filth,
as if there had never been poured upon it a drop of Divine grace. On this account, Christ declares,
that the punishment awaiting it will be the more dreadful, in proportion to the higher favors which
it had received from God. It deserves our earnest attention in this passage, that the profanation of
the gifts of God, as it involves sacrilege, will never pass unpunished; and that the more eminent
any one is, he will be punished with the greater severity, if he shall basely pollute the gifts which
God has bestowed upon him; and above all, an awful vengeance awaits us, if, after having received
the spiritual gifts of Christ, we treat him and his Gospel with contempt.
If they had been done in Sodom.  We have already hinted, that Christ speaks after the manner
of men, and does not bring forth, as from the heavenly sanctuary, 45 what God foresaw would happen
if he had sent a Prophet to the inhabitants of Sodom. But if quarrelsome persons are not satisfied
with this answer, every ground of objection is removed by this single consideration, that although
God had a remedy in his power for saving the inhabitants of Sodom, yet in destroying them he was
a just avenger. 46
Luke 10:16 .He that heareth you heareth me.  It is a mistake to suppose that this passage is a
repetition of what we formerly met with in the Gospel of Matthew 10:40 he that receiveth you
receiveth me47 Then, Christ was speaking of persons, but now, of doctrine. The former receiving
had a reference to offices of kindness; but now he recommends faith, which receives God in his
Word. The general meaning is, that the godliness of men is ascertained by the obedience of faith;
48 and that those who reject the Gospel, though they may boast of being the most eminent of the
worshippers of God, give evidence that they wickedly despise him.
We must now attend to the design of Christ. As a considerable portion of the world foolishly
estimates the Gospel according to the rank of men, and despises it because it is professed by persons
of mean and despicable condition, our Lord here contradicts so perverse a judgment. Again, almost
all are so proud, that they do not willingly submit to their equals, or to those whom they look down
upon as inferior to them. God has determined, on the other hand, to govern his Church by the
ministry of men, and indeed frequently selects the ministers of the Word from among the lowest
45 “Il ne vent point ici amener le conseil secret de Dieu ;” — “he does not intend here to exhibit the secret purpose of God.”
46 “Que toutesfois, en les destruisant et damnant, il n’a rien fait qui empesche qu’il ne soit tousiours recognue iuste en sa
punition et sa vengeance ;” — “that notwithstanding, in destroying and condemning them, He has done nothing to prevent Him
from being always acknowledged to be righteous in His punishment and in His vengeance.”
47 Harmony, volume 1 p. 475 .
48 “Que la crainte de Dieu qui est es hommes, se monstre par l’obeissance de la foy ;” — “that the fear of God which is in men
is manifested by the obedience of faith.”
17John Calvin Commentary on Matthew, Mark, Luke - Volume 2
dregs of the people. It was, therefore, necessary to support the majesty of the Gospel, that it might
not appear to be degraded by proceeding from the lips of men.
This is a remarkable commendation 49 of the outward ministry, when Christ declares, that
whatever honor and respect is rendered to the preaching of men, provided that the preaching be
faithful, God acknowledges as done to Himself. In two points of view, this recommendation is
useful. Nothing ought to be a stronger encouragement to us to embrace the doctrine of the Gospel,
than to learn that this is the highest worship of God, and a sacrifice of the sweetest odor, to hear
him speaking by human lips, and to yield subjection to his word, which is brought to us by men,
in the same manner as if he were descending from heaven or making known his will to us by angels.
Again, our confidence is established, and all doubt is removed, when we learn, that the testimony
of our salvation, when delivered to us by men whom God has sent, is not less worthy of credit, than
if His voice resounded from heaven. To deter us, on the other hand, from despising the Gospel, he
adds a severe threatening:
He that despiseth you despiseth me; and he that despiseth me despiseth him that sent me.  Those
who disdain to listen to ministers, however mean and contemptible they may be, offer an insult,
not to men only, but to Christ himself, and to God the Father. While a magnificent eulogium is here
pronounced on the rank of pastors, who honestly and faithfully discharge their office, it is absurd
in the Pope and his clergy to take this as a pretense for cloaking their tyranny. Assuredly, Christ
does not speak in such a manner, as to surrender into the hands of men the power which the Father
has given him, but only to protect his Gospel against contempt. Hence it follows, that he does not
transfer to the persons of men the honor which is due to himself, but only maintains that it cannot
be separated from his Word. If the Pope wishes to be received, let him bring forward the doctrine
by which he may be recognized as a minister of Christ; but so long as he continues to be what he
now is, a mortal enemy of Christ, and destitute of all resemblance to the Apostles, let him cease to
deck himself with borrowed feathers.
