---
layout: reading-chapter
book_id: gospel_harmony
book_title: 加尔文福音书注释
author_id: calvin
author_name: 约翰·加尔文
section: "60"
section_title: "MATTHEW 18:6-10 ； MARK 9:42-48 ； LUKE 17:1-2"
header-img: psalm-bg-mountain.jpg
date: 2026-04-30 20:15
---

MATTHEW 18:6-10 ; MARK 9:42-48 ; LUKE 17:1-2
Luke 17:1-2 Mark 9:42-48 Matthew 18:6-10
1. And he said to his
disciples, It is impossible but42. And whosoever shall
offend one of the little ones who6. But whosoever shall
offend one of those little ones
that offenses will come; but woe believe in me, it were better for who believe in me, it were better
to him by whom they come! 2. It him that a millstone were hung for him that a millstone were
were better for him that a around his neck, and that he hanged about his neck, and that
millstone were hung around his were thrown into the sea. he were sunk to the bottom of
neck, and that he were thrown 43. And if thy hand shall offend the sea. 7. Woe to the world on
into the sea, than that he should
offend one of these little ones.thee, cut it off; for it were better
for thee to enter lame into life,account of offenses! for offenses
must come; but woe to the man
  than that, having two hands, by whom the offense cometh!
thou shouldst go into hell, into 8. But if thy hand or thy foot
the unquenchable fire: 503offend thee, cut it off, and cast
it from thee; 501 for it is better for 44. Where their worm dieth not,
and their fire is not quenched. thee to enter lame or maimed
45. And if thy foot shall offend into life, than that, having two
thee, cut if off; for it were better hands or two feet, thou shouldst
for thee to enter lame into life, be cast into the everlasting fire.
than that, having two feet, thou 9. And if thine eye offend thee,
shouldst be cast into hell, into pluck it out, and cast it from
the unquenchable fire: thee; 502 for it is better that thou
46. Where their worm dieth not, shouldst enter into life having
and their fire is not quenched. one eye, than that, having two
47. And if thine eye offend thee, eyes, thou shouldst be cast into
pluck it out; for it were better for hell-fire. 10. Beware of
thee to enter with one eye into despising one of these little
the kingdom of God than that, ones; for I say to you, That their
having two eyes, thou shouldst angels always behold the face of
my Father who is in heaven. be cast into hell-fire: 48. Where
  their worm dieth not, and their
fire is not quenched.
 
 
Matthew 18:6 .But whosoever shall offend one of those little ones.  This appears to be added
for the consolation of the godly, that they may not be rendered uneasy by their condition, if they
are despised by the world. It is a powerful obstruction to the voluntary exercise of modesty, when
they imagine, that by so doing they expose themselves to contempt; and it is hard to be not only
503 “Au feu qui ne s’esteint point ;” — “into the fire which is not quenched.”
501 “Et le iette [arriere] de toy ;” — “and cast it behind thee.”
502 “Et le iette [arriere] de toy ;” — “and cast it behind thee.”
207John Calvin Commentary on Matthew, Mark, Luke - Volume 2
treated disdainfully, but almost trodden under foot, by haughty men. Christ therefore encourages
his disciples by the consoling truth, that, if their mean condition draws upon them the insults of the
world, God does not despise them.
But he appears to have had likewise another object in view; for a dispute had arisen amongst
them as to the first place of honor, from which it might naturally have been inferred that the Apostles
were tainted with sinful ambition. Every man who thinks too highly of himself, or desires to be
preferred to others, must necessarily treat his brethren with disdain. To cure this disease, Christ
threatens a dreadful punishment, if any man in his pride shall throw down those who are oppressed
with poverty, or who in heart are already humbled.
Under the word offend  he includes more than if he had forbidden them to despise their brethren;
though the man who gives himself no concern about offending  the weak, does so for no other reason,
than because he does not render to them the honor to which they are entitled. Now as there are
various kinds of offenses , it will be proper to explain generally what is meant by offending If any
man through our fault either stumbles, or is drawn aside from the right course, or retarded in it, we
are said to offend  him. 504 Whoever then desires to escape that fearful punishment which Christ
denounces, let him stretch out his hand to the little ones  who are despised by the world, and let him
kindly assist them in keeping the path of duty; for Christ recommends them to our notice, that they
may lead us to exercise voluntary humility; as Paul enjoins the children of God to
condescend to men of low estate, ( Romans 12:16 ,)
and again says that
we ought not to please ourselves, ( Romans 15:1 .)
To hang a millstone about a  man’s neck, and drown him in the sea , was the punishment then
reckoned the most appalling, and which was inflicted on the most atrocious malefactors. When our
Lord alludes to this punishment, we are enabled to perceive how dear and precious those persons
are in the sight of God, who are mean and despised in the eyes of the world.
7.Woe to the world on account of offenses!  This passage may be explained in two ways. It may
be taken actively , as meaning that Christ pronounces a curse on the authors of offenses; and then
by the term world , we must understand all unbelievers. Or it may be taken passively , as meaning
that Christ deplores the evils which he perceives to be rapidly coming on the world on account of
offenses; as if he had said, that no plague will be more destructive, or attended by more fearful
calamities, than the alarm or desertion of many on account of offenses.  The latter meaning is more
appropriate; for I have no doubt that our Lord, who had spoken on another occasion about offenses,
proceeded to discourse more largely on this subject; in order to make his disciples more attentive
and watchful in guarding against them. That Satan may not gain advantage over us through our
sluggishness, our Lord breaks out into an exclamation, that there is nothing which we ought to
dread more than offenses; for as Satan has innumerable kinds of them in his hand, he constantly,
and at almost every step, throws new difficulties in our way; while we, through excessive tenderness
or sloth, are too ready to yield. The consequence is, that there are few who make tolerable progress
in the faith of Christ; and of the few who have begun to walk in the way of salvation, there is
scarcely one in ten who has the courage to persevere till he reaches the goal. 505 Now since Christ
504 “L’Escriture dit que nous oftensons ou scandalizons cestuy la .” — “Scripture says that we give offense or scandal to that
man.”
505 “Qui persevere courageusement iusqu’a la fin ;” — “who perseveres courageously to the end.”
208John Calvin Commentary on Matthew, Mark, Luke - Volume 2
intended to strike his disciples with terror on account of offenses , and thus to arouse them to exertion,
woe to our indifference, if each of us does not earnestly apply himself to overcome those offenses
For offenses must come.  To awaken more powerfully their care and anxiety, our Lord reminds
his disciples that there is no possibility of walking but in the midst of various offenses; as much as
to say, that this is an evil which cannot be avoided. Thus he confirms the former statement; for
Christ shows us how great are the inconveniences which arise from offenses , since the Church never
will be, and indeed never can be, free from this evil. But he does not state the reason of this necessity,
as Paul does, when, speaking of heresies, he says that they arise, that the good may be made manifest ,
(1 Corinthians 11:19 .) It must be held by us as a fixed principle, that it is the will of God to leave
his people exposed to offense ,in order to exercise their faith, and to separate believers, as the refuse
and the chaff, from the pure wheat. Does any one object or complain, that blame attaches to our
Lord for giving loose reins to Satan, to accomplish the destruction of wretched men? It is our duty
to think and speak with the deepest reverence of the secret purposes of God, of which this is one,
that the world must be disturbed by offenses
But woe to the man by whom the offense cometh.  After having exhorted his disciples to beware
of offenses , he again breaks out against those who occasion them. To impart the greater vehemence
to the threatening, he adds, that neither a right eye nor a right hand ought to be spared, if they
occasion offense to us; for I explain these words as added for the purpose of amplification. Their
meaning is, that we ought to be so constant and so zealous in opposing offenses , that we would
rather choose to pluck out our eyes, or cut off our hands,  than give encouragement to offenses; for
if any man hesitate to incur the loss of his limbs, he spares them at the risk of throwing himself
into eternal perdition. What dreadful vengeance then awaits those who by offenses shall bring ruin
on their brethren! 506 As those two verses have been already explained 507 under Matthew 5:29,30 ,
it was sufficient, on the present occasion, to glance at the reason why Christ repeats here the same
statement.
10.Beware of despising one of these little ones  As pride is the mother of disdain, and as contempt
hardens men in giving offense , our Lord, for the purpose of applying an appropriate remedy for
curing this disease, forbids his disciples to despise the little ones.  And certainly, as we have already
hinted, no man who has a proper care for his brethren will ever allow himself, on light grounds, to
give them offense This conclusion of our Lord’s discourse has the same tendency as the
commencement of it, to remind us that we ought to strive with each other who shall be most
submissive and modest; for God embraces with wonderful love the little ones  It would be strange
indeed that a mortal man should despise ,or treat as of no account, those whom God holds in such
high esteem. He proves this love from the fact, that angels, who are ministers of their salvation,
enjoy intimately the presence of God. Yet I do not think that he intended merely to show what
honor God confers on them by appointing angels to be their guardians, but likewise to threaten
those who despise them; as if he had said, that it is no light matter to despise those who have angels
for their companions and friends, to take vengeance in their behalf. We ought therefore to beware
of despising  their salvation, which even angels have been commissioned to advance.
506 “Lesquels par scandales auront donne occasion de faire perdre et damner leurs freres ;” — “who by offenses shall have
given occasion to bring ruin and damnation on their brethren.”
507 Harmony, vol. 1 p. 291 .
209John Calvin Commentary on Matthew, Mark, Luke - Volume 2
The interpretation given to this passage by some commentators, as if God assigned to each
believer his own angel , does not rest on solid grounds. For the words of Christ do not mean that a
single angel is continually occupied with this or the other person; 508 and such an idea is inconsistent
with the whole doctrine of Scripture, which declares that theangels encamp around (Psalm 34:7 )
the godly, and that not one angel only, but many, have been commissioned to guard every one of
the faithful. Away, then, with the fanciful notion of a good and evil angel, and let us rest satisfied
with holding that the care of the whole Church is committed to angels , to assist each member as
his necessities shall require. It will perhaps be asked, Do the angels occupy a station inferior to
ours, because they have been appointed to be our ministers? I reply, Though by nature they take
rank above us, this does not prevent them from rendering service to God 509 in dispensing the favor
which he freely bestows upon us. For this reason they are called our angels , because their labors
are bestowed on us.
