---
layout: reading-chapter
book_id: gospel_harmony
book_title: 加尔文福音书注释
author_id: calvin
author_name: 约翰·加尔文
section: "61"
section_title: "MATTHEW 18:11-14 ； LUKE 15:1-10"
header-img: psalm-bg-mountain.jpg
date: 2026-04-30 20:15
---

MATTHEW 18:11-14 ; LUKE 15:1-10
Luke 15:1-10 Matthew 18:11-14
1. And all the publicans and sinners drew near
to him to hear him. 2. And the Pharisees and11. For the Son of man is come to save that
which was lost. 12. What think you? If a man
scribes murmured, saying, This man receiveth shall have a hundred sheep, and one of them shall
sinners, and eateth with them. 3. And he spoke go astray, doth he not leave the ninety-nine, and
to them a parable, saying, 4. What man is there go to the mountains, and seek that which had
among you, who hath a hundred sheep, and, if gone astray? 13. And if he happen to find it,
he shall lose one of them, doth not leave the verily, I say to you, he rejoiceth more on account
ninety-nine in the wilderness, and go after that of that sheep than on account of the ninety-nine
which was lost, till he find it? 5. And when he which had gone astray. 14. So it is not the will
hath found it, he layeth it on his shoulders, of your Father who is in heaven, that one of those
little ones should perish. rejoicing: 6. And coming home, he calleth his
  friends and neighbors, saying to them, Rejoice
with me; for I have found the sheep which was
lost. 7. I say to you, that in like manner there will
be greater joy in heaven over one repenting
sinner, than over ninety-nine righteous persons
who do not need repentance. 8. Or what woman
having ten pieces of money, 510 if she shall lose
one piece, doth no light a candle, and sweep the
house, and seek diligently until she find it?
9. And when she hath found it, she calleth
508 “Les mots n’emportent pas qu’un Ange n’ait autre charge que de veiller tousiours sur cestuy-ci ou sur cestuy-la ;” — “the
words do not bear that one Angel has nothing else to do than to watch continually over this or that man.”
509 “Cela n’empesche point que Dieu n’use de leur service ;” — “that does not hinder God from employing their services.”
510 “Dix drachmes ;” — “ten drachmas.”’
210John Calvin Commentary on Matthew, Mark, Luke - Volume 2
together her friends and neighbors, saying,
Rejoice with me, for I have found the piece which
I had lost. 10. In like manner, I tell you, there
will be joy in the presence of the angels of God
over one repenting sinner.
 
Matthew 18:11 .For the Son of man cometh  Christ now employs his own example in persuading
his disciples to honor even weak and despised brethren; for he came down from heaven to save not
them only, but even the dead who were lost It is in the highest degree unreasonable that we should
disdainfully reject those whom the Son of God has so highly esteemed. And even if the weak labor
under imperfections which may expose them to contempt, our pride is not on that account to be
excused; for we ought to esteem them not for the value of their virtues, but for the sake of Christ;
and he who will not conform himself to Christ’s example is too saucy and proud.
12.What think you?  Luke carries the occasion of this parable still farther back, as having arisen
from the murmurings of the Pharisees and scribes against our Lord, whom they saw conversing
daily with sinners. Christ therefore intended to show that a good teacher ought not to labor less to
recover those that are lost, than to preserve those which are in his possession; though according to
Matthew the comparison proceeds farther, and teaches us not only that we ought to treat with
kindness the disciples of Christ, but that we ought to bear with their imperfections, and endeavor,
when they wander, to bring them back to the road. For, though they happen sometimes to wander,
yet as they are sheep over which God has appointed his Son to be shepherd, so far are we from
having a right to chase or drive them away roughly, that we ought to gather them from their
wanderings; for the object of the discourse is to lead us to beware of losing what God wishes to be
saved  The narrative of Luke presents to us a somewhat different object. It is, that the whole human
race belongs to God, and that therefore we ought to gather those that have gone astray, and that we
ought to rejoice as much, when they that are lost return to the path of duty, as a man would do who,
beyond his expectation, recovered something the loss of which had grieved him.
Luke 15:10 .There will be joy in the presence of the angels.  If angels mutually rejoice with
each other in heaven, when they see that what had wandered is restored to the fold, we too, who
have the same cause in common with them, ought to be partakers of the same joy But. how does
he say that the repentance of one ungodly man yields greater joy than the perseverance of many
righteous men to angels , whose highest delight is in a continued and uninterrupted course of
righteousness ? I reply, though it would be more agreeable to the wishes of angels (as it is also more
desirable) that men should always remain in perfect integrity, yet as in the deliverance of a sinner,
who had been already devoted to destruction, and had been cut off as a rotten member from the
body, the mercy of God shines more brightly, he attributes to angels , after the manner of men, a
greater joy arising out of an unexpected good.
Over one repenting sinner.  The word repentance is specially limited to the conversion of those
who, having altogether turned aside from God, rise as it were from death to life; for otherwise the
exercise of repentance ought to be uninterrupted throughout our whole life, 511 and no man is
exempted from this necessity, since every one is reminded by his imperfections that he ought to
511 “Tant que nous sommes en ce monde ;” — “as long as we are in this world.”
211John Calvin Commentary on Matthew, Mark, Luke - Volume 2
aim at daily progress. But it is one thing, when a man, who has already entered upon the right
course, though he stumble, or fall, or even go astray, endeavors to reach the goal; and another thing,
when a man leaves a road which was entirely wrong, or only starts in the right course. 512 Those
who have already begun to regulate their life by the standard of the divine law, do not need that
kind of repentance which consists in beginning to lead a holy and pious life, though they must
groan 513 under the infirmities of the flesh, and labor to correct them.
