---
layout: reading-chapter
book_id: gospel_harmony
book_title: 加尔文福音书注释
author_id: calvin
author_name: 约翰·加尔文
section: "66"
section_title: "MATTHEW 17:24-27"
header-img: psalm-bg-mountain.jpg
date: 2026-04-30 20:15
---

MATTHEW 17:24-27
Matthew 17:24-27
24. And when they came to Capernaum, those who received the didrachma came to Peter, and
said, Does not your Master pay the didrachma? 25. He saith, Yes. And when he came into the
house, Jesus anticipated him, saying, What thinkest thou, Simon? From whom do the kings of the
earth receive tribute or custom? From their own children, or from strangers? 26. Peter saith to him,
From strangers. Jesus saith to him, Then are the children free. 27. But that we may not offend
them, go thou to the sea, throw a hook, and take that fish which cometh first up; and when thou
hast opened its mouth, thou wilt find a stater: take that, and give it for me and for thee.
 
 
Matthew 17:24 .And when they came to Capernaum.  We must attend, first of all, to the design
of this narrative; which is, that Christ, by paying tribute of his own accord, declared his subjection,
as he had taken upon him the form of a servant , (Philippians 2:7 ,) but at the same time showed,
both by words and by the miracle, that it was not by obligation or necessity, but by a free and
voluntary submission, that he had reduced himself so low that the world looked upon him as nothing
more than one of the common people. This was not a tax which was wont to be demanded on
576 “Comment il est possible que Dieu punisse ;” — “how it is possible for God to punish.”
228John Calvin Commentary on Matthew, Mark, Luke - Volume 2
crossing the sea, 577 but an annual tribute laid individually on every man among the Jews, so that
they paid to tyrants what they were formerly in the habit of paying to God alone. For we know that
this tax was imposed on them by the Law, that, by paying every year half a stater , (Exodus 30:13 ,)
they might acknowledge that God, by whom they had been redeemed, was their supreme King.
When the kings of Asia appropriated this to themselves, the Romans followed their example. Thus
the Jews, as if they had disowned the government of God, paid to profane tyrants the sacred tax
required by the Law. But it might appear unreasonable that Christ, when he appeared as the Redeemer
of his people, should not himself be exempted from paying tribute  To remove that offense, he
taught by words, that it was only by his will that he was bound; and he proved the same thing by
a miracle, for he who had dominion over the sea and the fishes might have released himself from
earthly government. 578
Doth not your Master pay?  Some think that the collectors of the tribute intended to throw blame
on Christ, as if he were claiming exemption from the common law. For my own part, as men of
that class are insolent and abusive, I interpret these words as having been spoken by way of reproach.
It was customary for every man to be enrolled in his own city; but we know that Christ had no fixed
habitation in one place. Those people therefore inquire if he be exempted from the law on the
ground of his frequent removals from place to place. 579
25.He saith, Yes. Peter’s reply contains a modest excuse 580 to satisfy them: “he will pay,” 581
says he; from which we infer that Christ had formerly been accustomed to pay, for Peter promises
it as a thing about which there was no doubt. That they address him rather than the other disciples
was, as I conjecture, because Christ lived with him; for if all had occupied the same habitation, the
demand would have been made on all alike. It is therefore very ridiculous in the Papists, on so
frivolous a pretense, to make Peter a partner in the dignity of Christ. “He chose him (they say) to
be his vicar , and bestowed on him equal honors, by making him equal to himself in the payment
of tribute.” But in this way they will make all swine-herds vicars of Christ, for they paid as much
as he did. And if the primacy of Peter was manifested in the paying of tribute, whence comes that
exemption which they claim for themselves? But this is the necessary result of the shameful trifling
of those who corrupt Scripture according to their own fancy.
What thinkest thou, Simon?  In this Christ gave a proof of his Divinity, by showing that nothing
was unknown to him. But what is the object of his discourse? Is it to exempt himself and his
followers from subjection to the laws? Some explain it thus, that Christians have a right to be
exempted, but that they voluntarily subject themselves to the ordinary government, because otherwise
human society cannot be maintained. To me, however, the meaning appears to be more simple; for
there was danger lest the disciples might think that Christ had come in vain, because, by paying
tribute cut off the hope of deliverance; and therefore he simply affirms that he pays tribute, solely
because he voluntarily refrains from exercising his right and power. Hence it is inferred that this
577 “Les didrachmes, dont est yci parle, n’estoit pas un peage qu’on payast a passer d’un coste en autre de la mer ;” — “ The
didrachma , which are here spoken of, were not a custom paid on crossing from one side of the sea to the other.”
578 “Pouvoit bien, s’il eust voulu, s’exempter de la suiection des princes terriens ;” — “might easily, if he had chosen, have
exempted himself from subjection to earthly princes.”
579 “Si par ce moyen qu’il est maintenant ci, maintenant la, il faudra qu’il eschappe sans rien payer ;” — “if, because he is
sometimes here, and sometimes there, he must escape without paying anything.”
580 “Une excuse bien modeste et honneste ;” — “a very modest and civil excuse.”
581 “Oui, (dit-il,) il payera ;” — “ Yes, (says he,) he will pay.”
229John Calvin Commentary on Matthew, Mark, Luke - Volume 2
takes nothing from his reign. But why does he not openly claim his right? It is because his kingly
power was unknown to the collectors of the tribute. For, though his kingdom be spiritual, still we
must maintain, that as he is the only Son of God, he is also the heir of the whole world, so that all
things ought to be subject to him, and to acknowledge his authority. The meaning, therefore, is,
that God has not appointed kings, and established governments over mankind, in such a manner as
to place him who is the Son in the same rank indiscriminately with others, but yet that, of his own
accord, he will be a servant along with others, till the glory of his kingdom be displayed.
The Pope has not less foolishly than successfully abused this passage to exempt his clergy from
the laws; as if the shaving of the head made them sons of God, and exempted them from tributes
and taxes. But nothing else was intended by Christ than to claim for himself the honor of a King’s
Son, so as to have at least a home privileged and exempted from the common law. And therefore
it is also highly foolish in the Anabaptists to torture these words for overturning political order,
since it is more than certain, that Christ does not say any thing about a privilege common to believers,
but only draws a comparison from the sons of kings, who, together with their domestics, are
exempted. 582
27.Throw a hook.  Though I acknowledge that Christ had not always full coffers, yet I think
that he was not compelled by poverty to give this order to Peter, but that he did so in order to prove
by a miracle, that he had a more extensive dominion than all earthly kings, since he had even fishes
for his tributaries. And we do not read that this was done more than once, because one proof was
enough for his whole life. Thou wilt find a stater. A stater was of the same value as a shekel, namely,
four drachms or two didrachma. 583
