---
layout: reading-chapter
book_id: gospel_harmony
book_title: 加尔文福音书注释
author_id: calvin
author_name: 约翰·加尔文
section: "67"
section_title: "MATTHEW 19:1-2； MARK 9:38-40 , 10:1； LUKE 9:49-56"
header-img: psalm-bg-mountain.jpg
date: 2026-04-30 20:15
---

MATTHEW 19:1-2; MARK 9:38-40 , 10:1; LUKE 9:49-56
Luke 9:49-56 Mark 9:38-40 Matthew 19:1-2
49. And John answering
said, Master, we saw one casting38. And John answered him,
saying, Master, we saw one1. And it happened, when
Jesus had finished these
out devils in thy name; and we casting out devils in thy name, discourses, he departed from
forbade him, because he and he followeth not us; and we Galilee, and came into the coasts
followeth not with us. 50. And forbade him, because he of Judea beyond Jordan. 2. And
Jesus said to him, Forbid him followeth him, because he great multitudes followed him,
and he cured them there. not; for he who is not against us followeth not us. 39. And Jesus
  is for us. 51. And it happened, said, Forbid him not; for there is
when the days of his being no man who, if he has performed
received up were in course of a miracle in my name, can easily
being fulfilled, and he set his speak evil of me. 40. For he who
is not against us is for us. face steadfastly to go to
582 “Lesquels sont exempts de tous imposts, eux et leurs domestiques ;” — “who are exempted from all taxes, they and their
domestics.”
583 The didrachmon weighed two drachms , and the stater , which weighed two didrachma , or four drachms , was worth about
two shillings and sixpence of our money. — Ed.
230John Calvin Commentary on Matthew, Mark, Luke - Volume 2
Mark 10:1 Jerusalem. 52. And he sent
messengers before his face; and 1. And when he had risen
thence, he came into the coasts they went and entered into a
town of the Samaritans, to make of Judea, through the district
ready for him: 53. And they did which is beyond Jordan. And
not receive him, because his face again the multitudes assemble to
was as if he were going to him, and again he taught them,
as he was accustomed. Jerusalem. 58454. And when his
disciples James and John saw it,  
they said, Lord, wilt thou that
we command fire to come down
from heaven, and consume them,
even as Elijah did? 55. And
Jesus, turning, rebuked them,
saying, You know not of what
spirit you are. 56. For the Son of
man is not come to destroy
men’s lives, but to save them.
And they went into another
village.
 
Mark 9:38 .Master, we saw one.  Hence it is evident that the name of Christ was at that time
so celebrated, that persons who were not of the number of his intimate disciples used that name ,
or perhaps even abused it, for I will not venture to avouch any thing on this point as certain. It is
possible that he who is here mentioned had embraced the doctrine of Christ, and betaken himself
to the performance of miracles with no bad intention; but as Christ bestowed this power on none
but those whom he had chosen to be heralds of his Gospel, I think that he had rashly taken, or rather
seized upon, this office. Now though he was wrong in making this attempt, and in venturing to
imitate the disciples without receiving a command to do so, yet his boldness was not without success:
for the Lord was pleased, in this way also, to throw luster around his name, 585 as he sometimes
does by means of those of whose ministry he does not approve as lawful. It is not inconsistent with
this to say, that one who was endued with special faith followed a blind impulse, and thus proceeded
inconsiderately to work miracles.
I now come to John and his companions. They say that they forbade  a man to work miracles
Why did they not first ask whether or not he was authorized? For now being in a state of doubt and
suspense, they ask the opinion of their Master. Hence it follows, that they had rashly taken on
themselves the right to forbid ; and therefore every man who undertakes more than he knows that
he is permitted to do by the word of God is chargeable with rashness. Besides, there is reason to
suspect the disciples of Christ of ambition, because they are anxious to maintain their privilege and
honor. For how comes it that they all at once forbid a man who is unknown to them to work miracles,
584 “Pourtant que sa face estoit tournee pour aller en Ierusalem ;” — “because his face was turned to go to Jerusalem.”
585 “Pour avancer la gloire de son nom ;” — “to advance the glory of his name.”
231John Calvin Commentary on Matthew, Mark, Luke - Volume 2
but because they wish to be the sole possessors of this right? For they assign the reason, that he
followeth not Christ; as much as to say, “He is not one of thy associates, as we are: why then shall
he possess equal honor?”
39.Forbid him not.  Christ did not wish that he should be forbidden ; not that he had given him
authority, or approved of what he did, or even wished his disciples to approve of it, but because,
when by any occurrence God is glorified, we ought to bear with it and rejoice. Thus Paul, ( Philippians
1:18,) though he disapproves of the dispositions of those who used the Gospel as a pretense for
aggrandizing themselves, yet rejoices that by this occurrence the glory of Christ is advanced. We
must attend also to the reason which is added, that  it is impossible for any man who works miracles
in the name of Christ to speak evil of Christ , and therefore this ought to be reckoned as gain; for
hence it follows, that if the disciples had not been more devoted to their own glory than anxious
and desirous to promote the glory of their Master, they would not have been offended when they
saw that glory heightened and enlarged in another direction. And yet Christ declares that we ought
to reckon as friends those who are not open enemies.
40.For he who is not against us is for us.  He does not enjoin us to give a loose rein to rash
men, and to be silent while they intermeddle with this and the other matter, according to their own
fancy, and disturb the whole order of the Church: for such licentiousness, so far as our calling
allows, must be restrained. He only affirms that they act improperly, who unseasonably prevent
the kingdom of God from being advanced by any means whatever. And yet he does not acknowledge
as his disciples, or reckon as belonging to his flock, those who hold an intermediate place between
enemies and friends, but means that,. so far as they do no harm, they are useful and profitable: for
it is a proverbial saying, which reminds us that we ought not to raise a quarrel till we are constrained.
Luke 9:51 . While the days of his being received up, etc. Luke alone relates this narrative, which,
however, is highly useful on many accounts. For, first, it describes the divine courage and firmness
of Christ586in despising death; secondly, what deadly enmities are produced by differences about
religion; thirdly, with what headlong ardor the nature of man is hurried on to impatience; next, how
ready we are to fall into mistakes in imitating the saints; and, lastly, by the example of Christ we
are called to the exercise of meekness. The death of Christ is called his being received up, (ἀνάληψις )
not only because he was then withdrawn from the midst of us,587 but because, leaving the mean
prison of the flesh, he ascended on high.
52.And he sent messengers.  It is probable that our Lord was, at that time, attended by a great
multitude of followers; for the messengers were not sent to prepare a splendid banquet, or to select
some magnificent palace, but only to tell that a vast number of guests were approaching. They
again, when excluded and repulsed, wait for their Master. Hence, too, we learn, what I remarked
in the second place, 588 that when men differ among themselves about the doctrines of religion, they
readily break out into hatred of each other; for it was an evidence of very bitter hatred to withhold
food from the hungry, and lodging from those who were fatigued. But the Samaritans have such a
dislike and enmity at the Jewish religion, that they look upon all who follow it as unworthy of any
kindness. Perhaps, too, they were tormented with vexation at being despised; for they knew that
586 “La magnanimite et constance admirable de Iesus Christ ;” — “the wonderful magnanimity and firmness of Jesus Christ.”
587 “Non pas seulement pource qu il a lors este enleve et comme retranche du milieu des hommes ;” — “not only because he
was then raised up, and, as it were, withdrawn from the midst of men.”
588 See our Author’s observations  above on Luke 9:51 .
232John Calvin Commentary on Matthew, Mark, Luke - Volume 2
their temple was detested by the Jews as profane, and that they were considered to be spurious and
corrupt worshippers of God. But as the superstition once admitted kept so firm a hold of them, they
strove, with wicked emulation, to maintain it to the last. At length the contention grew so hot, that
it consumed both nations in one conflagration; for Josephus assures us that it was the torch which
kindled the Jewish war. Now though Christ might easily have avoided that dislike, he chooses
rather to profess himself to be a Jew, than by an indirect denial to procure a lodging.
53.He steadfastly set his face.  By this expression Luke has informed us that Christ, when he
had death before his eyes, rose above the fear of it, and went forward to meet it; but, at the same
time, points out that he had a struggle, and that, having vanquished terror, 589 he boldly presented
himself to die. For if no dread, no difficulty, no struggle, no anxiety, had been present to his mind,
what need was there that he should set his face steadfastly?590 But as he was neither devoid of
feeling, nor under the influence of foolish hardihood, he must have been affected by the cruel and
bitter death, or rather the shocking and dreadful agony, which he knew would overtake him from
the rigorous judgment of God; and so far is this from obscuring or diminishing his glory, that it is
a remarkable proof of his unbounded love to us; for laying aside a regard to himself that he might
devote himself to our salvation, through the midst of terrors he hastened to death, the time of which
he knew to be at hand.
54.And when His disciples James and John saw it . The country itself had perhaps suggested
to them the desire of thundering immediately against the ungodly; for it was there that Elijah had
formerly destroyed, by a fire from heaven, the king’s soldiers who had been sent to apprehend him,
(2 Kings 1:10 .) It therefore occurred to them that the Samaritans, who so basely rejected the Son
of God, were at that time devoted to a similar destruction. And here we see to what we are driven
by a foolish imitation 591 of the holy fathers. James and John plead the example of Elijah , but they
do not consider how far they differ from Elijah ; they do not examine properly their own intemperate
zeal, nor do they look at the calling of God. Under a pretext equally plausible did the Samaritans
cloak their idolatry, our fathers worshipped in this mountain , (John 4:20 .) But both were in the
wrong; for, neglecting the exercise of judgment, they were apes rather than imitators of the holy
fathers. Now though it is doubtful whether they think that they have the power in their own hand,
or ask Christ to give it to them, I think it more probable that, elated with foolish confidence, they
entertain no doubt that they are able to execute vengeance, provided that Christ give his consent.
55.You know not of what spirit you are  By this reply he not only restrained the unbridled fury
of the two disciples, but laid down a rule to all of us not to indulge our temper. For whoever
undertakes any thing, ought to be fully aware that he has the authority and guidance of the Spirit
of God, and that he is actuated by proper and holy dispositions. Many will be impelled by the
warmth of their zeal, but if the spirit of prudence be wanting, their ebullitions end in foam.
Frequently, too, it happens, that the impure feelings of the flesh are mingled with their zeal, and
that those who appear to be the keenest zealots for the glory of God are blinded by the private
feelings of the flesh. And therefore, unless our zeal be directed by the Spirit of God, it will be of
no avail to plead in our behalf, that we undertook nothing but from proper zeal. But the Spirit
589 “Estans victorieux par dessus ceste frayeur naturelle ;” — “being victorious over that natural dread.”
590 “Quel besoin estoit il qu’il prinst sa resolution, et par maniere de dire s’obstinast en soy-mesme ?” — “What need was there
that he should take his resolution, and, so to speak, persist in his own mind?”
591 “Une folle et inconsideree imitation des saincts peres ;” — “a foolish and ill-considered imitation of the holy fathers.”
233John Calvin Commentary on Matthew, Mark, Luke - Volume 2
himself will guide us by wisdom and prudence, that we may do nothing contrary to our duty, or
beyond our calling, nothing, in short, but what is prudent and seasonable; and, by removing all the
filth of the flesh, he may impart to our minds proper feelings, that we may desire nothing but what
God shall suggest. Christ likewise blames his disciples because, though they are widely distant
from the spirit of Elijah , 592 they rashly take upon themselves to do what he did. For Elijah executed
the judgment of God, which had been committed to him by the Spirit; but they rush to vengeance,
not by the command of God, but by the movement of the flesh. And therefore the examples of the
saints are no defense to us, unless the same Spirit that directed them dwell in us.
