---
layout: reading-chapter
book_id: gospel_harmony
book_title: 加尔文福音书注释
author_id: calvin
author_name: 约翰·加尔文
section: "68"
section_title: "MATTHEW 19:3-9 ； MARK 10:2-12"
header-img: psalm-bg-mountain.jpg
date: 2026-04-30 20:15
---

MATTHEW 19:3-9 ; MARK 10:2-12
Mark 10:2-12 Matthew 19:3-9
2. And the Pharisees, coming to him, asked
him, Is it lawful for a man to divorce his wife?3. And the Pharisees came to him, tempting
him, and saying to him, Is it lawful for a man to
tempting him. 3. But he answering said to them, divorce his wife for any cause whatever? 4. Who
What did Moses command you? 4. And they said, answering said to them, Have you not read, that
Moses permitted to write a letter of divorcement, he who made them at first, 593 made them male
and to send her away. 5. And Jesus answering and female? 5. And he said, Therefore shall a
said to them, For the hardness of your heart he man leave his father and mother, and be joined
wrote to you this commandment. 6. But at the to his wife; and they shall be one flesh.
beginning of the creation God made them male 6. Therefore now they are not two, but one flesh:
and female. 7. For this reason shall a man leave what God therefore hath joined, let not man
his father and mother, and cleave to his wife; separate. 7. They say to him, Why then did Moses
8. And they shall be one flesh: therefore now they order to give a letter of divorcement, and send
are not two, but one flesh. 9. What therefore God her away? 8. He said to them, Moses, for the
hath joined together let not man separate. 10. And hardness of your heart, permitted you to divorce
in the house his disciples again asked him about your wives; but at the beginning it was not so.
the same subject. 11. And he saith to them, 9. And I say to you, That whosoever shall divorce
Whososever shall divorce his wife, and marry his wife, except for fornication, and shall marry
another, committeth adultery against her. 12. And another, committeth adultery; and whosoever
if a woman shall divorce her husband, and shall
be married to another, she committeth adultery.shall marry her that is divorced committeth
adultery.
   
 
Matthew 19:3 .And the Pharisees came to him, tempting him.  Though the Pharisees lay snares
for Christ, and cunningly endeavor to impose upon him, yet their malice proves to be highly useful
to us; as the Lord knows how to turn, in a wonderful manner, to the advantage of his people all the
contrivances of wicked men to overthrow sound doctrine. For, by means of this occurrence, a
592 “De l’esprit et affection d’Elie ;” — “from the spirit and disposition of Elijah.”
593 “Qui feit l’homme des le commencement ;” — “who made man from the beginning.”
234John Calvin Commentary on Matthew, Mark, Luke - Volume 2
question arising out of the liberty of divorce was settled, and a fixed law was laid down as to the
sacred and indissoluble bond of marriage. The occasion of this quibbling was, that the reply, in
whatever way it were given, could not, as they thought, fail to be offensive.
They ask, Is it lawful for a man to divorce his wife for any cause whatever?  If Christ reply in
the negative, they will exclaim that he wickedly abolishes the Law; and if in the affirmative, they
will give out that he is not a prophet of God, but rather a pander, who lends such countenance to
the lust of men. Such were the calculations which they had made in their own minds; but the Son
of God, who knew how to take the wise in their own craftiness , (Job 5:13 ,) disappointed them,
sternly opposing unlawful divorces, and at the same time showing that he brings forward nothing
which is inconsistent with the Law. For he includes the whole question under two heads: that the
order of creation ought to serve for a law, that the husband should maintain conjugal fidelity during
the whole of life; and that divorces were permitted , not because they were lawful, but because
Moses had to deal with a rebellious and intractable nation.
4.Have you not read?  Christ does not indeed reply directly to what was asked, but he fully
meets the question which was proposed; just as if a person now interrogated about the Mass were
to explain faithfully the mystery of the Holy Supper, and at length to conclude, that they are guilty
of sacrilege and forgery who venture either to add or to take away any thing from the pure institution
of the Lord, he would plainly overturn the pretended sacrifice of the Mass. Now Christ assumes as
an admitted principle, that at the beginning God joined the male to the female,  so that the two made
an entire man; and therefore he who divorces his wife tears from him, as it were, the half of himself.
But nature does not allow any man to tear in pieces his own body.
He adds another argument drawn from the less to the greater. The bond of marriage is more
sacred than that which binds children to their parents. But piety binds children to their parents by
a link which cannot be broken. Much less then can the husband renounce his wife. Hence it follows,
that a chain which God made is burst asunder, if the husband divorce his wife. 594
Now the meaning of the words is this: God, who created the human race, made them male and
female,  so that every man might be satisfied with his own wife, and might not desire more. For he
insists on the number two, as the prophet Malachi, ( 2:15,)when he remonstrates against polygamy,
employs the same argument, that God, whose Spirit was so abundant that He had it in His power
to create more, yet made but one man, that is, such a man as Christ here describes. And thus from
the order of creation is proved the inviolable union of one husband with one wife. If it be objected,
that in this way it will not be lawful, after the first wife is dead, to take another, the reply is easy,
that not only is the bond dissolved by death, but the second wife is substituted by God in the room
of the first, as if she had been one and the same woman.
5.Therefore shall a man leave his father and mother.  It is uncertain whether Moses represents
Adam or God as speaking these words; but it is of little consequence to the present passage which
of these meanings you choose, for it was enough to quote the decision which God had pronounced,
though it might have been uttered by the mouth of Adam. Now he who marries a wife is not
commanded absolutely to leave his father ; for God would contradict himself, if by marriage He set
aside those duties which He enjoins on children towards their parents; but when a comparison is
made between the claims, the wife is preferred to the father and mother  But if any man abandon
594 “Que le mari qui se separe d’avecques sa femme rompt le lien dupuel Dieu estoit autheur ;” — “that the husband, who
separates from his wife, bursts the chain of which God was the author.”
235John Calvin Commentary on Matthew, Mark, Luke - Volume 2
his father, and shake off the yoke by which he is bound, no man will own such a monster; 595 much
less will he be at liberty to dissolve a marriage.
And the two shall be one flesh.  This expression condemns polygamy not less than it condemns
unrestrained liberty in divorcing wives; for, if the mutual union of two persons was consecrated by
the Lord, the mixture of three or four persons is unauthorized. 596 But Christ, as I stated a little ago,
applies it in a different manner to his purpose; namely, to show that whoever divorces his wife tears
himself in pieces, because such is the force of holy marriage, that the husband and wife become
one man. For it was not the design of Christ to introduce the impure and filthy speculation of Plato,
but he spoke with reverence of the order which God has established. Let the husband and wife,
therefore, live together in such a manner, that each shall cherish the other in the same manner as
if they were the half of themselves. Let the husband rule, so as to be the head, and not the tyrant,
of his wife; and let the woman, on the other hand, yield modestly to his commands.
6.What God therefore hath joined.  By this sentence Christ restrains the caprice of husbands,
that they may not, by divorcing their wives, burst asunder the sacred knot. And as he declares that
it is not in the power of the husband to dissolve the marriage, so likewise he forbids all others to
confirm by their authority unlawful divorces; for the magistrate abuses his power when he grants
permission to the husband to divorce his wife. But the object which Christ had directly in view
was, that every man should sacredly observe the promise which he has given, and that those who
are tempted, by wantonness or wicked dispositions, to divorce, may reflect thus with themselves:
“Who, art thou that allowest thyself to burst asunder what God hath joined? ” But this doctrine may
be still farther extended. The Papists, contriving for us a church separated from Christ the Head,
leave us an imperfect and mutilated body. In the Holy Supper, Christ joined the bread and the wine;
but they have dared to withhold from all the people the use of the cup. To these diabolical corruptions
we shall be at liberty to oppose these words, What God hath joined let not man separate
7.Why then did Moses order?  They had thought of this calumny, 597 if, which was more probable,
Christ should demand a proper cause to be shown in cases of divorce; for it appears that whatever
God permits by his law, whose will alone establishes the distinction between what is good or evil,
is lawful. But Christ disarms the falsehood and slander by the appropriate reply, that Moses permitted
it on account of their obstinacy, and not because he approved of it as lawful. And he confirms his
opinion by the best argument, because it was not so at the beginning.  He takes for granted that,
when God at first instituted marriage, he established a perpetual law, which ought to remain in
force till the end of the world. And if the institution of marriage is to be reckoned an inviolable
law, it follows that whatever swerves from it does not arise from its pure nature, but from the
depravity of men.
But it is asked, Ought Moses to have permitted what was in itself bad and sinful? I reply, That,
in an unusual sense of the word, he is said to have  permitted what he did not severely forbid; 598 for
he did not lay down a law about divorces, so as to give them the seal of his approbation, but as the
wickedness of men could not be restrained in any other way, he applied what was the most admissible
595 “Il n’y a celuy qui ne fust estonne d’un tel monstre ;” — “there is no man who would not be astonished at such a monster.”
596 “C’est un meslinge faux et pervers ;” — “it is a false and wicked mixture.”
597 “Ils avoyent songe ceste calomnie pour l’avoir toute preste ;” — “they had thought of this calumny, to have it all ready.”
598 “Ie repond, Qu’a parler proprement, il ne l’a pas permis: mais d’autant qu’il ne l’a pas defendu estroittement, il est dit qu’il
l’a permis ;” — “I reply, That, strictly speaking, he did not permit  it; but in so far as he did not strictly forbid it, he is said to have
permitted  it.”
236John Calvin Commentary on Matthew, Mark, Luke - Volume 2
remedy, that the husband should, at least, attest the chastity of his wife. For the law was made solely
for the protection of the women, that they might not suffer any disgrace after they had been unjustly
rejected. Hence we infer, that it was rather a punishment inflicted on the husbands, than an indulgence
or permission fitted to inflame their lust. Besides, political and outward order is widely different
from spiritual government. What is lawful and proper the Lord has comprehended under the ten
words . 599 Now as it is possible that many things, for which every man’s conscience reproves and
charges him, may not be called in question at a human tribunal, it is not wonderful if those things
are connived at by political laws.
Let us take a familiar instance. The laws grant to us a greater liberty of litigation than the law
of charity allows. Why is this? Because the right cannot be conferred on individuals, unless there
be an open door for demanding it; and yet the inward law of God declares that we ought to follow
what charity shall dictate. And yet there is no reason why magistrates should make this an excuse
for their indolence, if they voluntarily abstain from correcting vices, or neglect what the nature of
their office demands. But let men in a private station beware of doubling the criminality of the
magistrates, by screening their own vices under the protection of the laws. For here the Lord
indirectly reproves the Jews for not, reckoning it enough that their stubbornness was allowed to
pass unpunished, if they did not implicate God as defending their iniquity. And if the rule of a holy
and pious life is not always, or in all places, to be sought from political laws, much less ought we
to seek it from custom.
9.But I say to you. Mark relates that this was spoken to the disciples apart, when they had come
into the house; but Matthew , leaving out this circumstance, gives it as a part of the discourse, as
the Evangelists frequently leave out some intermediate occurrence, because they reckon it enough
to sum up the leading points. There is therefore no difference, except that the one explains the
matter more distinctly than the other. The substance of it is: though the Law does not punish divorces,
which are at variance with God’s first institution, yet he is an adulterer who rejects his wife and
takes another. For it is not in the power of a man to dissolve the engagement of marriage, which
the Lord wishes to remain inviolate; and so the woman who occupies the bed of a lawful wife is a
concubine.
But an exception is added; for the woman, by fornication, cuts herself off, as a rotten member,
from her husband, and sets him at liberty. Those who search for other reasons ought justly to be
set at nought, because they choose to be wise above the heavenly teacher. They say that leprosy is
a proper ground for divorce, because the contagion of the disease affects not only the husband, but
likewise the children. For my own part, while I advise a religious man not to touch a woman afflicted
with leprosy, I do not pronounce him to be at liberty to divorce her. If it be objected, that they who
cannot live unmarried need a remedy, that they may not be burned , I answer, that what is sought
in opposition to the word of God is not a remedy. I add too, that if they give themselves up to be
guided by the Lord, they will never want continence, for they follow what he has prescribed. One
man shall contract such a dislike of his wife, that he cannot endure to keep company with her: will
polygamy cure this evil? Another man’s wife shall fall into palsy or apoplexy, or be afflicted with
some other incurable disease, shall the husband reject her under the pretense of incontinency? We
599 Where the English version gives the words, ten commandments ,the phrase in the original Hebrew is,             , the ten words ,
(Exodus 34:28 ; Deuteronomy 4:13; 10:4 .) — Ed
237John Calvin Commentary on Matthew, Mark, Luke - Volume 2
know, on the contrary, that none of those who walk in their ways are ever left destitute of the
assistance of the Spirit.
For the sake of avoiding fornication , says Paul, let every man marry a wife , (1 Corinthians 7:2 .)
He who has done so, though he may not succeed to his wish, has done his duty; and, therefore, if
any thing be wanting, he will be supported by divine aid. To go beyond this is nothing else than to
tempt God. When Paul mentions another reason, namely, that when, through a dislike of godliness,
wives happen to be rejected by unbelievers, a godly brother or sister is not, in such a case, liable
to bondage , (1 Corinthians 7:12,15 ,) this is not inconsistent with Christ’s meaning. For he does not
there inquire into the proper grounds of divorce, but only whether a woman continues to be bound
to an unbelieving husband, after that, through hatred of God, she has been wickedly rejected, and
cannot be reconciled to him in any other way than by forsaking God; and therefore we need not
wonder if Paul think it better that she should part with a mortal man than that she should be at
variance with God.
But the exception which Christ states appears to be superfluous. For, if the adulteress deserve
to be punished with death, what purpose does it serve to talk of divorces? But as it was the duty of
the husband to prosecute his wife for adultery, in order to purge his house from infamy, whatever
might be the result, the husband, who convicts his wife of uncleanness, is here freed by Christ from
the bond. It is even possible that, among a corrupt and degenerate people, this crime remained to
a great extent unpunished; as, in our own day, the wicked forbearance of magistrates makes it
necessary for husbands to put away unchaste wives, because adulterers are not punished. It must
also be observed, that the right belongs equally and mutually to both sides, as there is a mutual and
equal obligation to fidelity. For, though in other matters the husband holds the superiority, as to
the marriage bed, the wife has an equal right: for he is not the lord of his body; and therefore when,
by committing adultery, he has dissolved the marriage, the wife is set at liberty.
And whosoever shall marry her that is divorced.  This clause has been very ill explained by
many commentators; for they have thought that generally, and without exception, celibacy is
enjoined in all cases when a divorce has taken place; and, therefore, if a husband should put away
an adulteress, both would be laid under the necessity of remaining unmarried. As if this liberty of
divorce meant only not to lie with his wife; and as if Christ did not evidently grant permission in
this case to do what the Jews were wont indiscriminately to do at their pleasure. It was therefore a
gross error; for, though Christ condemns as an adulterer the man who shall marry a wife that has
been divorced , this is undoubtedly restricted to unlawful and frivolous divorces. In like manner,
Paul enjoins those who have been so dismissed
to remain unmarried, or to be reconciled to their husbands,
(1 Corinthians 7:11 ;)
that is, because quarrels and differences do not dissolve a marriage. This is clearly made out
from the passage in Mark, where express mention is made of the wife who has left her husband:
and if the wife shall divorce her husband  Not that wives were permitted to give their husbands a
letter of divorcement, unless so far as the Jews had been contaminated by foreign customs; but
Mark intended to show that our Lord condemned the corruption which was at that time universal,
that, after voluntary divorces, they entered on both sides into new marriages; and therefore he makes
no mention of adultery.
238John Calvin Commentary on Matthew, Mark, Luke - Volume 2
