---
layout: reading-chapter
book_id: gospel_harmony
book_title: 加尔文福音书注释
author_id: calvin
author_name: 约翰·加尔文
section: "69"
section_title: "MATTHEW 19:10-12"
header-img: psalm-bg-mountain.jpg
date: 2026-04-30 20:15
---

MATTHEW 19:10-12
Matthew 19:10-12
10. His disciples say to him, If such be the case of the man with his wife, 600 it is not expedient
to enter into marriage. 11. Who said to them, 601 All are not capable of receiving this saying, but
those to whom it is given. 12. For there are eunuchs, who were so born from their mother’s womb;
and there are eunuchs, who have been made eunuchs by men; and there are eunuchs, who have
castrated themselves for the sake of the kingdom of heaven. He who can receive it, 602 let him
receive it.
 
10.His disciples say to him. As if it were a hard condition for husbands to be so bound to their
wives, that, so long as they remain chaste, they are compelled to endure every thing rather than
leave them, the disciples, roused by this answer of Christ, reply, that it is better to want wives than
to submit to a knot of this kind.603But why do they not, on the other hand, consider how hard is
the bondage of wives,604 but because, devoted to themselves and their own convenience, they are
driven by the feeling of the flesh to disregard others, and to think only of what is advantageous for
themselves? Meanwhile, it is a display of base ingratitude that, from the dread or dislike of a single
inconvenience, they reject a wonderful gift of God. It is better, according to them, to avoid marriage
than to bind one’s self by the bond of living always together.605 But if God has ordained marriage
for the general advantage of mankind, though it may be attended by some things that are disagreeable,
it is not on that account to be despised. Let us therefore learn not to be delicate and saucy, but to
use with reverence the gifts of God, even if there be something in them that does not please us.
Above all, let us guard against this wickedness in reference to holy marriage; for, in consequence
of its being attended by many annoyances, Satan has always endeavored to make it an object of
hatred and detestation, in order to withdraw men from it. And Jerome has given too manifest a
proof of a malicious and wicked disposition, in not only loading with calumnies that sacred and
divinely appointed condition of life, but in collecting as many terms of reproach ( λοιδορίας )as he
could from profane authors, in order to take away its respectability. But let us recollect that whatever
annoyances belong to marriage are accidental, for they arise out of the depravity of man. Let us
remember that, since our nature was corrupted, marriage began to be a medicine, and therefore we
need not wonder if it have a bitter taste mixed with its sweetness. But we must see how our Lord
confutes this folly.
11.All are not capable of receiving this saying.  By this he means, that the choice is not placed
in our hands, as if we were to deliberate on a matter submitted to us. If any man thinks it
advantageous for him to want a wife, and, without making any inquiry, lays upon himself an
obligation to celibacy, 606 he is widely mistaken. God, who has declared it to be good that a man
600 “Avec sa femme .”
601 “Il leur dit ;” — “he said to them.”
602 “Qui peut comprendre ceci;” — “he who can receive this.”
603 “Que de se mettre en une telle necessite et suiection ;” — “than to place one’s self under such restraint and subjection.”
604 “La servitude que les femmes ont a porter ;” — “the bondage of which wives have to endure.”
605 “De vivre tousiours avec une femme ;” — “of living always with one wife.”
606 “S’il s’astreigne a n’estre point marie ;” — “if he bind himself not to be married.”
239John Calvin Commentary on Matthew, Mark, Luke - Volume 2
should have a woman to be his helper, will punish the contempt of his own appointment; for mortals
take too much on themselves, when they endeavor to exempt themselves from the heavenly calling.
But Christ proves that it is not free to all to make what choice they please, because the gift of
continence is a special gift; for when he says that all are not capable of receiving it, but those to
whom it is given , he plainly shows that it was not given to all. And this reproves the pride of those
who do not hesitate to claim for themselves what Christ so manifestly refuses to them.
12.For there are eunuchs Christ distinguishes three kinds of eunuchs Those who are so by
nature, or who have been castrated by men, are debarred from marriage by this defect, for they are
not men. He says that there are other eunuchs ,who have castrated themselves, that they may be
more at liberty to serve God; and these he exempts from the obligation to marry. Hence it follows,
that all others who avoid marriage fight against God with sacrilegious hardihood, after the manner
of the giants. When Papists urge the word castrate ,(εὐνοῦχισαν ) as if at their own pleasure men
might lay themselves under obligation to continence, it is too frivolous. For Christ has already
declared, that God gives it to whom he chooses; and, a little afterwards, we shall find him
maintaining, that it is folly in any man to choose to live unmarried, when he has not received this
special gift. This castration, therefore, is not left to free will; but the plain meaning is, while some
men are by nature fit to marry, though they abstain, they do not tempt God, because God grants
them exemption.607
For the sake of the kingdom of heaven.  Many foolishly explain this as meaning, in order to
deserve eternal life; as if celibacy contained within itself some meritorious service, as the Papists
imagine that it is an angelical state. But Christ meant nothing more than that persons unmarried
ought to have this for their object, that, being freed from all cares, they may apply themselves more
readily to the duties of piety. It is, therefore, a foolish imagination, that celibacy is a virtue; for it
is not in itself more pleasing to God than fasting, and is not entitled to be reckoned among the duties
which he requires from us, but ought to have a reference to another object. Nay more, Christ
expressly intended to declare that, though a man be pure from fornication, yet his celibacy is not
approved by God, if he only consults his own ease and comfort, but that he is excused on this single
ground, that he aims at a free and unrestrained meditation on the heavenly life. In short, Christ
teaches us, that it is not enough, if unmarried men live chastely, unless they abstain from having
wives, for the express purpose of devoting themselves to better employments. 608
He that can receive it, let him receive it.  By this conclusion Christ warns them, that the use of
marriage is not to be despised, unless we intend, with blind rashness, to rush headlong to destruction:
for it became necessary to restrain the disciples, whom he saw acting inconsiderately and without
judgment. But the warning is useful to all; for, in selecting a manner of life, few consider what has
been given to them, but men rush forward, without discrimination, in whatever direction inconsiderate
zeal prompts them. And I wish that the warning had been attended to in past times; but men’s ears
are stopped by I know not what enchantments of Satan, so that, contrary to nature, and, at it were,
in spite of God, those whom God called to marriage have bound themselves by the cord of perpetual
607 “Pource qu’il leur permet de s’en passer, et leur baille un privilege par dessus les autres ;” — “because he allows them to
abstain from it, and grants them a privilege above others.”
608 “Afin d’estre plus libres pour s’employer a meilleures choses a la gloire de Dieu ;” — “in order to be more free for being
employed in better things for the glory of God.”
240John Calvin Commentary on Matthew, Mark, Luke - Volume 2
virginity609 Next came the deadly cord of a vow, by which wretched souls were bound, 610 so that
they never rose out of the ditch.
