---
layout: reading-chapter
book_id: gospel_harmony
book_title: 加尔文福音书注释
author_id: calvin
author_name: 约翰·加尔文
section: "7"
section_title: "LUKE 10:17-20"
header-img: psalm-bg-mountain.jpg
date: 2026-04-30 20:15
---

LUKE 10:17-20
Luke 10:17-20
17. And the seventy returned with joy, saying, Lord, even the devils are subject to us in thy
name. 5018. And he said to them, I beheld Satan falling from heaven like lightning. 19. Lo, I give
you power to tread on serpents and scorpions, and on all the power of the enemy, and nothing shall
hurt you. 20. Nevertheless, rejoice not in this, that the spirits are subject to you; but rejoice, because
your names are written in heaven.
 
17.And the seventy returned.  It is evident, that the faith of the seventy  disciples in the words
of Christ had not been full and complete, when they returned, exulting over it as a thing new and
unexpected, that they had cast out devils  by the power of Christ. Nay, they had received this power
49 “C’est donc une louange et recommendation singuliere ;” — “it is then a singular praise and recommendation.”
50 “Par ton Nom ;” — “by thy Name.”
18John Calvin Commentary on Matthew, Mark, Luke - Volume 2
accompanied by a command. At the same time, I have no doubt that, when they departed, they were
convinced that nothing which the Master had said to them would fail of its accomplishment; but
afterwards, when the matter proceeded to an extent which surpassed their expectations, they were
astonished at the sight. 51 And this is frequently the case with believers, that they receive from the
word but a slight perception of the Divine power, and are afterwards excited to admiration by actual
experience. What was the nature of that joy will more clearly appear from Christ’s reply.
18.I beheld Satan  From one instance Christ leads them to the whole class; for he commanded
his Gospel to be published for the very purpose of overturning Satan’s kingdom. 52 So then, while
the disciples rested solely on that demonstration which they had obtained from experience, Christ
reminds them, that the power and efficacy of their doctrine extends farther, and that its tendency
is to extirpate the tyranny which Satan exercises over the whole human race. We have now
ascertained the meaning of the words. When Christ commanded that his Gospel should be preached,
he did not at all attempt a matter of doubtful result, but foresaw the approaching ruin of Satan. 53
Now since the Son of God cannot be deceived, and this exercise of his foresight relates to the whole
course of the Gospel, we have no reason to doubt, that whenever he raises up faithful teachers, he
will crown their labor with prosperous success.
Hence we infer, that our deliverance from the bondage of Satan is effected in no other way than
through the Gospel; and that those only make actual proficiency in the Gospel, in whom Satan loses
his power, so that sin is destroyed, and they begin to live to the righteousness of God. We ought
also to attend to the comparison which he employs, that the thunder of the Gospel makes Satan fall
like lightning; for it expresses the divine and astonishing power of the doctrine, which throws down,
in a manner so sudden and violent, the prince of the world armed with such abundant forces. It
expresses also the wretched condition of men, on whose heads fall the darts of Satan, who rules in
the air, and holds the world in subjection under his feet, till Christ appear as a Deliverer.
19.Lo, I give you power.  This is said by way of admission. Christ does not affirm that the gift
of which they now boast is not illustrious, but reminds them, that they ought to keep their eye
chiefly on something loftier still, and not remain satisfied with outward miracles. He does not
altogether condemn their joy, as if it were groundless, but shows it to be faulty in this respect, that
they were immoderately delighted with a temporal favor, and did not elevate their minds higher.
To this disease even the godly are almost all liable. Though the goodness of God is received by
them with gratitude, yet the acts of the Divine kindness do not assist them, as they ought to do, by
becoming ladders for ascending to heaven. This makes it necessary that the Lord should, as it were,
stretch out his hand to raise them up, that they may not rest satisfied with the earth, but may aspire
to heavenly renovation. The power of the enemy  is the name given by him to every kind of
annoyance; for all that is hostile to us is wielded against us by Satan. I do not mean that every thing
which tends to injure men is placed at his disposal; but that, being armed with the curse of God, he
endeavors to turn to our destruction all his chastisements, and seizes them as weapons for the
purpose of wounding us.
51 “Ils furent esmerveillez et esbahis de voir cela advenir ;” — “they were astonished and overwhelmed at seeing that happen.”
52 “A ceste fin de renverser et destruire ;” — “for the very purpose of overthrowing and destroying.”
53 “Christ n’a point entreprins, ou essaye une chose a l’aventure, et de laquelle l’issue fust incertaine: mais a veu que la ruine
de Satan s’en en-suyvroit ;” — “Christ did not undertake or attempt a thing at random, and the result of which was uncertain;
but saw that the ruin of Satan would follow from it.”
19John Calvin Commentary on Matthew, Mark, Luke - Volume 2
20.Your names are written.  As it was the design of Christ to withdraw his disciples from a
transitory joy, that they might glory in eternal life, he leads them to its origin and source, which is,
that they were chosen by God and adopted as his children. He might indeed have commanded them
to rejoice that they had been regenerated by the Spirit of God, ( Titus 3:5 ,) and become new creatures
in Christ,  (2 Corinthians 5:17 ;) that they had been enlightened (Ephesians 1:18 ) in the hope of
salvation, and had received the earnest of the inheritance, (Ephesians 1:14 .) But he intended to
point out, that the source from which all these benefits had flowed was the free election of God,
that they might not claim any thing for themselves. Reasons for praising God are no doubt furnished
by those acts of his kindness which we feel within us; but eternal election, which is without us,
shows more clearly that our salvation rests on the pure goodness 54 of God. The metaphorical
expression, your names are written in heaven, means, that they were acknowledged by God as His
children and heirs, as if they had been inscribed in a register. 55
