---
layout: reading-chapter
book_id: gospel_harmony
book_title: 加尔文福音书注释
author_id: calvin
author_name: 约翰·加尔文
section: "70"
section_title: "LUKE 18:15-17"
header-img: psalm-bg-mountain.jpg
date: 2026-04-30 20:15
---

LUKE 18:15-17
Luke 18:15-17 Mark 10:13-16 Matthew 19:13-15
15. And they presented to
him also infants, that he might13. And they brought to him
children, that he might touch13. Then were presented to
him children, that he might lay
touch them; which, when the them; but the disciples rebuked hands on them and pray; but the
disciples saw, they rebuked those who presented them. disciples rebuked them. 14. And
them. 16. But Jesus, when he 14. And when Jesus saw it, he Jesus said to them, Suffer
had called them to him, said, was displeased, and said to children, and forbid them not, to
Suffer children to come to me, them, Suffer children to come to come to me; for of such is the
and do not forbid them; for of me, and do not forbid them; for kingdom of heaven. 15. And
such is the kingdom of God. of such is the kingdom of when he had laid hands on them,
he departed thence. 17. Verily I say to you, heaven. 15. Verily I say to you,
Whosoever shall not receive the Whosoever shall not receive the
kingdom of God as a child shall
not enter into it.kingdom of God as a child shall
not enter into it. 16. And when
  he had taken them in his arms,
he laid hands on them, and
blessed them.
 
 
This narrative is highly useful; for it shows that Christ receives not only those who, moved by
holy desire and faith, freely approach to him, but those who are not yet of age to know how much
they need his grace. Those little children  have not yet any understanding to desire his blessing; but
when they are presented to him, he gently and kindly receives them, and dedicates them to the
Father 611 by a solemn act of blessing. We must observe the intention of those who present the
children; for if there had not been a deep-rooted conviction in their minds, that the power of the
Spirit was at his disposal, that he might pour it out on the people of God, it would have been
unreasonable to present their children. There is no room, therefore, to doubt, that they ask for them
a participation of his grace; and so, by way of amplification, Luke adds the particle also; as if he
had said that, after they had experienced the various ways in which he assisted adults, they formed
an expectation likewise in regard to children , that, if he laid hands on them , they would not leave
609 “De perpetuelle virginite, comme on dit ;” — “of perpetual virginity, as it is called.”
610 “Le voeu qui a este comme un licol pour tenir les poures ames enserrees de court ;” — “the vow, which was like a halter to
keep poor souls firmly bound.”
611 “A Dieu son Pere ;” — “to God his Father.”
241John Calvin Commentary on Matthew, Mark, Luke - Volume 2
him without having received some of the gifts of the Spirit. The laying on of hands  (as we have
said on a former occasion) was an ancient and well known sign of blessing ; and so there is no reason
to wonder, if they desire that Christ, while employing that solemn ceremony, should pray for the
children  At the same time, as the inferior are blessed by the better , (Hebrews 7:7 ,) they ascribe to
him the power and honor of the highest Prophet.
Matthew 19:13 . But the disciples rebuked them. If a crown 612 had been put on his head, they
would have admitted it willingly, and with approbation; for they did not yet comprehend his actual
office. But they reckon it unworthy of his character to receive children ; and their error wanted not
plausibility; for what has the highest Prophet and the Son of God to do with infants? But hence we
learn, that they who judge of Christ according to the feeling of their flesh are unfair judges; for
they constantly deprive him of his peculiar excellencies, and, on the other hand, ascribe, under the
appearance of honor, what does not at all belong to him. Hence arose an immense mass of
superstitions, which presented to the world a fancied Christ. 613 And therefore let us learn not to
think of him otherwise than what himself teaches, and not to assign to him a character different
from what he has received from the Father. We see what happened with Popery. They thought that
they were conferring a great honor on Christ, if they bowed down before a small piece of bread;
but in the sight of God it was an offensive abomination. Again, because they did not think it
sufficiently honorable to him to perform the office of an Advocate for us, they made for themselves
innumerable intercessors; but in this way they deprived him of the honor of Mediator.
14. Suffer children. He declares that he wishes to receive children ; and at length, taking them
in his arms,  he not only embraces, but blesses them by the laying on of hand; from which we infer
that his grace is extended even to those who are of that age. And no wonder; for since the whole
race of Adam is shut up under the sentence of death, all from the least even to the greatest must
perish, except those who are rescued by the only Redeemer. To exclude from the grace of redemption
those who are of that age would be too cruel; and therefore it is not without reason that we employ
this passage as a shield against the Anabaptists. They refuse baptism to infants , because infants are
incapable of understanding that mystery which is denoted by it. We, on the other hand, maintain
that, since baptism is the pledge and figure of the forgiveness of sins, and likewise of adoption by
God, it ought not to be denied to infants , whom God adopts and washes with the blood of his Son.
Their objection, that repentance and newness of life are also denoted by it, is easily answered.
Infants are renewed by the Spirit of God, according to the capacity of their age, till that power
which was concealed within them grows by degrees, and becomes fully manifest at the proper time.
Again, when they argue that there is no other way in which we are reconciled to God, and become
heirs of adoption, than by faith, we admit this as to adults, but, with respect to infants , this passage
demonstrates it to be false. Certainly, the laying on of hands  was not a trifling or empty sign, and
the prayers of Christ were not idly wasted in air. But he could not present the infants solemnly to
God without giving them purity. And for what did he pray for them, but that they might be received
into the number of the children of God? Hence it follows, that they were renewed by the Spirit to
the hope of salvation. In short, by embracing them, he testified that they were reckoned by Christ
among his flock. And if they were partakers of the spiritual gifts, which are represented by Baptism,
it is unreasonable that they should be deprived of the outward sign. But it is presumption and
612 “Une couronne royale ;” — “a royal crown.”
613 “Un Christ faict a la fantasie des hommes ;” — “a Christ made according to the fancy of men.”
242John Calvin Commentary on Matthew, Mark, Luke - Volume 2
sacrilege to drive far from the fold of Christ those whom he cherishes in his bosom, and to shut the
door, and exclude as strangers those whom he does not wish to be forbidden to come to him
For of such is the kingdom of heaven.  Under this term he includes both little children and those
who resemble them; for the Anabaptists foolishly exclude children, with whom the subject must
have commenced; but at the same time, taking occasion from the present occurrence, he intended
to exhort his disciples to lay aside malice and pride, and put on the nature of children  Accordingly,
it is added by Mark and Luke, that no man can enter into the kingdom of heaven unless he be made
to resemble a child. But we must attend to Paul’s admonition,
not to be children in understanding, but in malice,
(1 Corinthians 14:20 .)
