---
layout: reading-chapter
book_id: gospel_harmony
book_title: 加尔文福音书注释
author_id: calvin
author_name: 约翰·加尔文
section: "72"
section_title: "LUKE 18:24-27"
header-img: psalm-bg-mountain.jpg
date: 2026-04-30 20:15
---

LUKE 18:24-27
Luke 18:24-27 Mark 10:23-27 Matthew 19:23-26
24. And Jesus, perceiving
that he was sorrowful, said, With23. And when Jesus had
looked around, he said to his23. And Jesus said to his
disciples, Verily I say to you, A
what difficulty shall they who disciples, With what difficulty rich man will with difficulty
have riches enter into the shall they who have riches enter enter into the kingdom of
kingdom of God! 25. For it is into the kingdom of God! heaven. 24. Again I say to you,
easier for a camel to pass 24. And the disciples were It is easier for a camel 630 to pass
through the eye of a needle, than astonished at his words. But
629 “Que c’a este pour sonder et descouvrir un vice cache ;” — “that it was to search and discover a concealed vice.”
248John Calvin Commentary on Matthew, Mark, Luke - Volume 2
Jesus again replying, said to
them, Children, how difficult isthrough the eye of a needle, than
for a rich man to enter into thefor a rich man to enter into the
kingdom of God. 26. And they
it for those who have confidence kingdom of God. 25. And his that heard it said, And who can
in riches to enter into the disciples, when they had heard be saved? 63227. But he said, The
kingdom of God! 25. It is easier these things, were greatly things which are impossible with
men are possible with God. for a camel to pass through the amazed, 631 saying, Who then can
  eye of a needle, than for a rich be saved? 26. And Jesus,
man to enter into the kingdom beholding them, said to them,
of God. 26. And they wondered With men this is impossible; but
with God all things are possible. beyond measure, saying within
  themselves, And who can be
saved? 27. And Jesus beholding
them saith, With men it is
impossible, but not with God:
for all things are possible with
God.
 
Matthew 19:23 .A rich man will with difficulty enter. Christ warns them, not only how dangerous
and how deadly a plague avarice is, but also how great an obstacle is presented by riches. In Mark,
indeed, he mitigates the harshness of his expression, by restricting it to those only who place
confidence in riches  But these words are, I think, intended to confirm, rather than correct, the former
statement, as if he had affirmed that they ought not to think it strange, that he made the entrance
into the kingdom of heaven so difficult for the rich, because it is an evil almost common to all to
trust in their riches  Yet this doctrine is highly useful to all; to the rich , that, being warned of their
danger, they may be on their guard; to the poor, that, satisfied with their lot, they may not so eagerly
desire what would bring more damage than gain. It is true indeed, that riches do not, in their own
nature, hinder us from following God; but, in consequence of the depravity of the human mind, it
is scarcely possible for those who have a great abundance to avoid being intoxicated by them. So
they who are exceedingly rich are held by Satan bound, as it were, in chains, that they may not
raise their thoughts to heaven; nay more, they bury and entangle themselves, and became utter
slaves to the earth. The comparison of the camel ., which is soon after added, is intended to amplify
the difficulty; for it means that the rich are so swelled with pride and presumption, that they cannot
endure to be reduced to the straits through which God makes his people to pass. The word camel
denotes, I think, a rope used by sailors, rather than the animal so named. 633
630 “Il est plus facile qu’un Chable passe ;” — “it is easier for a CABLE to pass.”
632 “Qui pent donc estre sauve ?” — “Who can then be saved?”
631 “S’estonnerent grandement ;” — “were greatly astonished.”
633 “Vray est que le mot CAMELUS, dont a use l’Evangeliste, significant un chameau qu’un chable: mats i’aime mieux le
prendre en la derniere signification pour une grosse carde de nayire .” — “It is true that the word κάμηλος  which the Evangelist
has employed, means both a camel and a cable; but I prefer taking it in the latter signification for a large rope used by sailors .”
The two English words camel and cable closely resemble each other, and the corresponding Greek words differ only by a single
vowel; κάμηλος , denoting a camel ,and κάμιλος  a cable or rope It does not appear that Calvin ; relied on certain Manuscripts of
no good authority, which substitute καμίλον , for καμήλον . But he adopted the notion equally unfounded, that Greek writers
sometimes used κάμηλος , in the sense of κάμιλος . Had due allowance been made for the boldness of Eastern imagery, the
249John Calvin Commentary on Matthew, Mark, Luke - Volume 2
25.And his disciples, when they heard these things, were greatly amazed. The disciples are
astonished, because it ought to awaken in us no little anxiety, that riches obstruct the entrance into
the kingdom of God; for, wherever we turn our eyes, a thousand obstacles will present themselves.
But let us observe that, while they were struck with astonishment, they did not shrink from the
doctrines of Christ. The case was different with him who was lately mentioned; for he was so much
alarmed by the severity of the commandment, that he separated from Christ; while they, though
trembling, and inquiring , who can be saved? do not break off in an opposite direction, but are
desirous to conquer despair. Thus it will be of service to us to tremble at the threatenings of God:
whenever he denounces any thing that is gloomy or dreadful, provided that our minds are not
discouraged, but rather aroused.
26.With men this is impossible.  Christ does not entirely free the minds of his disciples from all
anxiety; for it is proper that they should perceive how difficult it is to ascend to heaven; first, that
they may direct all their efforts to this object; and next, that, distrusting themselves, they may
implore strength from heaven. We see how great is our indolence and carelessness; and what the
consequence would be if believers thought that they had to walk at ease, for pastime, along a smooth
and cheerful plain. Such is the reason why Christ does not extenuate the danger — though he
perceives the terror which it excited in his disciples — but rather increases it; for though formerly
he said only that it was difficult , he now affirms it to be impossible  Hence it is evident, that those
teachers are guilty of gross impropriety, who are so much afraid to speak harshly, that they give
indulgence to the slothfulness of the flesh. They ought to follow, on the contrary, the rule of Christ,
who so regulates his style that, after men have been bowed down within themselves, he teaches
them to rely on the grace of God alone, and, at the same time, excites them to prayer. In this manner,
the weakness of men is seasonably relieved, not by ascribing anything to them, but by arousing
their minds to expect the grace of God. By this reply of Christ is also refuted that widely embraced
principle — which the Papists have borrowed from Jerome — “Whoever shall say that it is
impossible to keep the law, let him be accursed. “For Christ plainly declares, that it is not possible
for men to keep the way of salvation, except so far as the grace of God assists them.
