---
layout: reading-chapter
book_id: gospel_harmony
book_title: 加尔文福音书注释
author_id: calvin
author_name: 约翰·加尔文
section: "73"
section_title: "LUKE 18:28-30 ； 22:28-30"
header-img: psalm-bg-mountain.jpg
date: 2026-04-30 20:15
---

LUKE 18:28-30 ; 22:28-30
Luke 18:28-30 ,
22:28-31Mark 10:28-31 Matthew 19:27-30
28. And Peter said, Lo, we
have left all, and have followed28. And Peter began to say
to him, Lo, we have left all, and27. Then Peter answering
said to him, Lo, we have left all,
supposed difficulty would have disappeared, and the most refined taste would have been fully gratified. The poet Southey has
seized the true spirit of the passage: — “S. The camel and the needle ,Is that then in your mind? “T. Even so. The text Is gospel
wisdom. I would ride the camel , — Yea leap him flying, through the needle’s eye ,As easily as such a pampered soul Could pass
the narrow gate.” At one period, critics showed a strong leaning to the idea of cable ,which our Author favors, but have now
very generally abandoned it, and returned to the true reading . — Ed
250John Calvin Commentary on Matthew, Mark, Luke - Volume 2
and have followed thee: what
therefore shall we have? 28. Andthee. 29. Who said to them,
Verily I say to you, There is nohave followed thee. 29. And
Jesus answering said, Verily I
Jesus said to them, Verily I say man who hath left house, or say to you, There is no man that
to you, That you who have parents, or brothers, or wife, or hath left house, or brothers, or
followed me in the regeneration, children, on account of the sisters, or father, or mother, or
when the Son of man shall sit on kingdom of God, 30. Who shall wife, or children, or fields, for
the throne of his majesty, you not receive much more at this my sake, and (for the sake) of
also shall sit on twelve thrones, time, and in the world to come
eternal life.the Gospel, 63530. But shall
receive a hundred-fold now at judging the twelve tribes of
Luke 22:28-30 this time, houses, and brothers,
and sister, and mothers, andIsrael. 29. And whosoever shall
leave houses, or brothers, or 28. You are they that have
continued with me in my children, and fields, with
persecution, and in the world tosisters, or father, or mother, or
wife, or children, or fields, for temptations: 637 29. And I
come eternal life. 31. But many the sake of my name, shall appoint to you the kingdom, 638
that are first shall be last, and the
last first. 636receive a hundred-fold, and shall
obtain eternal life. 30. And manyas my Father hath appointed it
to me; 30. That you may eat and
  that are first shall be last, and the
last first. 634drink at my table in my kingdom
and may sit on thrones, judging
the twelve tribes of Israel.
 
 
Matthew 19:27 .Then Peter answering said to him.  Peter tacitly compares himself and the
other disciples to the rich man, whom the world had turned aside from Christ. As they had led a
poor and wandering 639 life, which was not unaccompanied by disgrace and by annoyances, and as
no better condition for the future presented itself, he properly inquires if it be to no purpose that
they have left all their property, and devoted themselves to Christ; for it would be unreasonable if,
after having been stripped of their property by the Lord, they should not be restored to a better
condition.
Lo, we have left all.  But what were those all things? for, being mean and very poor men, they
scarcely had a home to leave, and therefore this boasting might appear to be ridiculous. And certainly
experience shows how large an estimate men commonly form of their duties towards God, as at
this day, among the Papists, those who were little else than beggars make it a subject of haughty
reproach that they have sustained great damage for the sake of the Gospel. But the disciples may
be excused on this ground, that, though their wealth was not magnificent, they subsisted at home,
by their manual labors, not less cheerfully than the richest man. And we know that men of humble
condition, who have been accustomed to a quiet and modest life, reckon it a greater hardship to be
torn from their wives and children than those who are led by ambition, or who are carried in various
635 “Pour l’amour de moy et de l’Evangile ;” — “for the love of me and of the Gospel.”
637 “Qui avez persevere avec moy ;” — “who have persevered with me.”
638 “Le royaume .”
636 “Et les derniers seront premiers ;” — “and the last shall be first.”
634 “Et les derniers seront premiers ;” — “and the last shall be first.”
639 “Et suiete a changer souvent de demeurance ;” — “and liable to change their residence frequently.”
251John Calvin Commentary on Matthew, Mark, Luke - Volume 2
directions by the gale of prosperity. Certainly, if some reward had not been reserved for the disciples,
it would have been foolish in them to have changed their course of life. 640 But though on that ground
they might be excused, they err in this respect, that they demand a triumph to be given them, before
they have finished their warfare. If we ever experience such uneasiness at delay, and if we are
tempted by impatience, let us learn first to reflect on the comforts by which the Lord soothes the
bitterness of the cup in this world, and next elevate our minds to the hope of the heavenly life; for
these two points embrace the answer of Christ.
28.Verily I say to you.  That the disciples may not think that they have lost their pains, and
repent of having begun the course, Christ warns them that the glory of his kingdom, which at that
time was still hidden, was about to be revealed. As if he had said, “There is no reason why that
mean condition should discourage you; for I, who am scarcely equal to the lowest, will at length
ascend to my throne of majesty. Endure then for a little, till the time arrive for revealing nay glory.”
And what does he then promise to them? That they shall be partakers of the same glory.
You also shall sit on twelve thrones  By assigning to them thrones , from which they may judge
the twelve tribes of Israel, he compares them to assessors, or first councilors and judges, who occupy
the highest seats in the royal council. We know that the number of those who were chosen to be
apostles was twelve , in order to testify that, by the agency of Christ, God purposed to collect the
remnant of his people which was scattered. This was a very high rank, but hitherto was concealed;
and therefore Christ holds their wishes in suspense till the latest revelation of his kingdom, when
they will fully receive the fruit of their election. And though the kingdom of Christ is, in some
respects, manifested by the preaching of the Gospel, there is no doubt that Christ here speaks of
the last day.
In the regeneration.  Some connect this term with the following clause. In this sense, regeneration
would be nothing else than the renovation which shall follow our restoration, when life shall swallow
up what is mortal, and when our mean body shall be transformed into the heavenly glory of Christ.
But I rather explain regeneration as referring to the first coming of Christ; for then the world began
to be renewed, and arose out of the darkness of death into the light of life. And this way of speaking
occurs frequently in the Prophets, and is exceedingly adapted to the connection of this passage. For
the renovation of the Church, which had been so frequently promised, had raised an expectation
of wonderful happiness, as soon as the Messiah should appear; and therefore, in order to guard
against that error, Christ distinguishes between the beginning and the completion of his reign.
Luke 22:28 .You are they who have continued with me.  Although Luke appears to relate a
different discourse of Christ, and one which was delivered at a different time, yet I have no doubt
that it refers to the same time. For it is not a continued discourse of Christ that is here related, but
detached sentences, without any regard to the order of time, as we shall shortly afterwards have
occasion to state. But he employs more words than Matthew; for he declares that, as the apostles
had accompanied him, and had remained steadfastly in his temptations,  they would also be partakers
of his glory. It is asked, in what sense does he call them his temptations? I think that he means the
contests by which God tried him and the apostles in common. And properly did he use the word
temptations; for, according to the feeling of human nature, his faith and patience were actually
tried.
640 “D’avoir change d’estat et de facon de vivre ;” — “for having changed their condition and their way of living.”
252John Calvin Commentary on Matthew, Mark, Luke - Volume 2
29.And I appoint to you the kingdom.  Here he makes them not only judges, but kings; for he
shares with them the kingdom which he received from the Father  There is an emphasis in the word
appoint , that they may not, by warmth and vehemence of desire, hasten too eagerly to possess the
kingdom of which he alone has the lawful right to dispose. By his own example, also, he exhorts
them to patience; for, though he was ordained by the Father to be a King, yet he was not immediately
raised to his glory, but even emptied Himself , (Philippians 2:7 ,) and by the ignominy of the cross
obtained kingly honor. To eat and drink at his table  is put metaphorically for being made partakers
of the same glory.
Matthew 19:29 .And whosoever shall forsake.  After having raised the expectation of his
followers to the hope of a future life, he supports them by immediate consolations, 641 and strengthens
them for bearing the cross. For though God permit his people to be severely afflicted, he never
abandons them, so as not to recompense their distresses by his assistance. And here he does not
merely address the apostles, but takes occasion to direct his discourse generally to all the godly.
The substance of it is this: Those who shall willingly lose all for the sake of Christ, will be more
happy even in this life than if they had retained the full possession of them; but the chief reward is
laid up for them in heaven.
But what he promises about recompensing them a hundredfold appears not at all to agree with
experience; for in the greater number of cases, those who have been deprived of their parents, or
children, and other relatives — who have been reduced to widowhood, and stripped of their wealth,
for the testimony of Christ — are so far from recovering their property, that in exile, solitude and
desertion, they have a hard struggle with severe poverty. I reply, if any man estimate aright the
immediate grace of God, by which he relieves the sorrows of his people, he will acknowledge that
it is justly preferred to all the riches of the world. For though unbelievers flourish, (Psalm 92:7 ,)
yet as they know not what awaits them on the morro w (James 4:14 ,) they must be always tossed
about in perplexity and terror, and it is only by stupefying themselves in some sort that they can at
all enjoy prosperity. 642 Yet God gladdens his people, so that the small portion of good which they
enjoy is more highly valued by them, and far sweeter, than if out of Christ they had enjoyed an
unlimited abundance of good things. In this sense I interpret the expression used by Mark, with
persecutions; as if Christ had said, Though persecutions always await the godly in this world, and
though the cross, as it were, is attached to their back, yet so sweet is the seasoning of the grace of
God, which gladdens them, that their condition is more desirable than the luxuries of kings.
30.And many that are first shall be last.  This sentence was added in order to shake off the
indolence of the flesh. The apostles, though they had scarcely begun the course, were hastening to
demand the prize. And such is the disposition of almost all of us, that, when a month has elapsed,
we ask, like soldiers who have served their time, to receive a discharge. But Christ exhorts those
who have begun well (Galatians 3:3; 5:7 ) to vigorous perseverance, and at the same time gives
warning, that it will be of no avail to runners to have begun with alacrity, if they lose courage in
the midst of the course. In like manner Paul also warns us, that not all who run obtain t/re prize ,
641 “De consolations de la vie presente ;” — “by consolations of the present life.”
642 “Ils ne peuvent iouir a leur aise des biens qu’ils ont, sinon qu’ils en-trent comme en une stupidite, et effacent tout sentiment
de leur conscience ;” — “they cannot enjoy at their ease the good things which they possess, unless they become, as it were,
stupid, and destroy every feeling of their conscience.”
253John Calvin Commentary on Matthew, Mark, Luke - Volume 2
(1 Corinthians 9:24 ;) and in another passage he exhorts believers, by referring to his own example,
to:
forget those things which are behind, and press forward to the remaining portion of their course,
(Philippians 3:13,14 .)
As often, therefore, as we call to mind the heavenly crown, we ought, as it were, to feel the
application of fresh spurs, that we may not be more indolent for the future.
