---
layout: reading-chapter
book_id: gospel_harmony
book_title: 加尔文福音书注释
author_id: calvin
author_name: 约翰·加尔文
section: "75"
section_title: "LUKE 18:31-34"
header-img: psalm-bg-mountain.jpg
date: 2026-04-30 20:15
---

LUKE 18:31-34
645A penny (δηνάριον ) was worth about sevenpence-halfpenny of our money. — Ed.
646 “Pource qu’on ne leur donnoit non plus qu’aux derniers ;” — “because no more was given to them than to the last.”
256John Calvin Commentary on Matthew, Mark, Luke - Volume 2
Luke 18:31-34 Mark 10:32-34 Matthew 20:17-19
31. And Jesus took the
twelve, and said to them, Lo, we32. And they were in the
way going up to Jerusalem; and17. And Jesus, going up to
Jerusalem, took the twelve
go up to Jerusalem, and all Jesus went before them: and disciples apart in the way, and
things which have been written they were amazed; and, while said to them, 18. Lo, we go up
by the prophets concerning the they followed him, where afraid. to Jerusalem; and the Son of
Son of man will be And having again taken aside man will be delivered to the
accomplished. 32. For he will be the twelve, he began to tell them chief priests and scribes; and
delivered to the Gentiles, and what things would happen to they will condemn him to death.
mocked, and insulted, and spat him: 33. Lo, we go up to 19. And they will deliver him to
on; 33 . And after having Jerusalem; and the Son of man the Gentiles to mock, and to
scourged, they will kill him; and will be delivered to the chief scourge, and to crucify him; 647
on the third day he will rise priests and scribes; and they will and on the third day he will rise
again. again. 34. And they understood condemn him to death, and will
  none of these things; and this deliver him to the Gentiles:
saying was hidden from them, 34. And will mock him, and
and they understood not the
things which were spoken. 648scourge him, and spit upon him,
and kill him; and on the third
day he will rise again.  
 
Though the apostles had been previously informed what kind of death awaited our Lord, yet
as they had not sufficiently profited by it, he now repeats anew what he had frequently said. He
sees that the day of his death is at hand; nay more, he is already in a state of readiness to offer
himself to be sacrificed; and, on the other hand, he sees the disciples not only afraid, but
overwhelmed by blind alarm. He therefore exhorts them to steadiness, that they may not immediately
yield to temptation. Now there are two methods by which he confirms them; for, by foretelling
what would happen, he not only fortifies them, that they may not give way, when a calamity, which
has arisen suddenly and contrary to expectation, takes them by surprise, but meets the offense of
the cross by a proof of his Divinity, that they may not lose courage at beholding his short abasement,
when they are convinced that he is the Son of God, and therefore will be victorious over death. The
second method of confirmation is taken from his approaching resurrection.
But it will be proper to look more closely at the words. Mark states — what is omitted by the
other two Evangelists — that, before our Lord explained to his disciples in private that he was
going straight to the sacrifice of death, not only they, but also the rest of his followers, were sorrowful
and trembli ng. Now why they were seized with this fear it is not easy to say, if it was not because
they had already learned that they had dangerous adversaries at Jerusalem, and would therefore
have wished that Christ should remain in some quiet retreat beyond the reach of the darts, rather
than voluntarily expose himself to such inveterate enemies. Although this fear was in many respects
improper, yet the circumstance of their following Christ is a proof of no ordinary respect and
obedience. It would indeed have been far better to hasten cheerfully and without regret, wheresoever
647 “Pour estre mocque, et flagelle, et crucifie ;” — “to be mocked, and scourged, and crucified.”
648 “Et ne pouvoyent entendre ce qu’il leur disoit ;” — “and they could not understand what he said to them.”
257John Calvin Commentary on Matthew, Mark, Luke - Volume 2
the Son of God chose to lead them; but commendation is due to their reverence for his person,
which appears in choosing to do violence to their own feelings rather than to forsake him.
Matthew 20:17 . Took the twelve disciples apart in the way  It may appear surprising that he
makes the twelve alone acquainted with his secret, since all have need of consolation, for all had
been alike seized with fear. I consider the reason why he did not publish his death to have been,
that the report might not spread too widely before the time. Besides, as he did not expect that the
warning would be of immediate advantage, he reckoned it enough to entrust it to a few, who were
afterwards to be his witnesses. For, as the seed thrown into the earth does not immediately spring
up, so we know that Christ said many things to the apostles which did not immediately yield fruit.
And if he had admitted all indiscriminately to this discourse, it was possible that many persons,
seized with alarm, might flee, and fill the ears of the public with this report; and thus the death of
Christ would have lost its glory, because he would have appeared to have rashly brought it on
himself. Secretly, therefore, he addresses the apostles, and does not even select them as qualified
to receive profit by it, but, as I lately hinted, that they may afterwards be witnesses.
On this subject Luke is more full than the others; for he relates not only that Christ predicted
the events which were near at hand, but also that he added the doctrine, that those things which had
been written by the prophets would be accomplished in the Son of man.  It was an excellent remedy
for overcoming temptation, to perceive in the very ignominy of the cross the marks by which the
Prophets had pointed out the promised Author of salvation. There can be no doubt that our Lord
pointed out also from the Prophets what kind of fruit they ought to expect from his death; for the
Prophets do not only teach that Christ must suffer, but add the reason, that he may reconcile the
world to God.
18. Lo, we go up to Jerusalem.  Hence we perceive that Christ was endued with divine fortitude
for overcoming the terrors of death, for he knowingly and willingly hastens to undergo it. 649 For
why does he, without any constraint, march forward to suffer a shocking murder, but because the
invincible power of the Spirit enabled him to subdue fear, and raised him above all human feelings?
By a minute detail of the circumstances, he gives a still more evident proof of his Divinity. For he
could not — as man — have foreseen that, after having been condemned by the chief priests and
scribes , he would be delivered up to the Gentiles,  and spat on , and mocked in various ways, and
scourged , and at length dragged to the punishment of the cross  Yet it must be observed that, though
our Lord was fully acquainted with the weakness of his disciples, he does not conceal from them
a very grievous offense. For — as we have said on a former occasion 650 — nothing could at that
time have happened more powerfully calculated to shake the minds of the godly, than to see the
whole of the sacred order of the Church opposed to Christ.
And yet he does not spare their weakness by deceiving them, but, candidly declaring the whole
matter, points out the way to overcome temptation; namely, by looking forward with certainty to
his resurrection. But as it was necessary that His death should go before, he makes their triumph,
in the meantime, to consist in hope.
Luke 18:34 . And they understood none of these things.  What stupidity was this, not to understand
what Christ said to them in a plain and familiar manner, on a subject not too lofty or intricate, but
649 “Veu qu’il se haste pour s’y presenter de son bon gre, et seachant bien ce qu’il avoit a endurer ;” — “since he hastens to
present himself to it of his own accord, and knowing well what he had to endure.”
650 See p. 301  of this volume.
258John Calvin Commentary on Matthew, Mark, Luke - Volume 2
of which they had, at their own suggestion, entertained some suspicion! But it is proper also to bear
in mind — what I have formerly observed — the reason why they were held in such gross ignorance,
which was, that they had formed the expectation of a joyful and prosperous advancement, and
therefore reckoned it to be in the highest degree absurd, that Christ should be ignominiously
crucified. Hence we infer with what madness the minds of men are seized through a false
imagination; and therefore we ought to be the more careful not to yield to any foolish thoughts,
and shut our eyes against the light.
