---
layout: reading-chapter
book_id: gospel_harmony
book_title: 加尔文福音书注释
author_id: calvin
author_name: 约翰·加尔文
section: "77"
section_title: "LUKE 22:24-27"
header-img: psalm-bg-mountain.jpg
date: 2026-04-30 20:15
---

LUKE 22:24-27
Luke 22:24-27 Mark 10:41-45 Matthew 20:24-27
24. And there arose also a
dispute among them, which of41. And when the ten heard
it, they began to be displeased24. And when the ten heard
it, 659 they were displeased with
them appeared to be greatest. with James and John. 42. And the two brethren. 25. And Jesus
25. And he said to them, The Jesus, when he had called them called them to him, and said,
kings of the Gentiles rule over to him, saith to them, You know You know that the princes of the
them; and they that have power that they who appear to rule over Gentiles rule over them, and
658 “Ce n’est pas a moy a le dormer ;” — “it does not belong to me to give it.”
659 “Les dix autres ayans ouy cela ;” — “ the other ten having heard that .”
262John Calvin Commentary on Matthew, Mark, Luke - Volume 2
they who are great exercise
authority over them. 26. It shallover them are called benefactors.
26. But you are not so: but hethe Gentiles exercise dominion
over them; and they who are
not be so among you: but that is greatest among you, let princes among them exercise
whoever wishes to be great him become as the younger; and power over them. 43. But it shall
among you, let him be your he that is ruler, as he that serves. not be so among you; but
minister; 27. And he that wishes 27. For which is greater, he that whoever wishes to become great
to be chief among you, let him sitteth at table, or her that among you, shall be your
be your servant: 28. Even as the serveth? Is it not he that sitteth minister;. And whoever wishes
Son of man came not that he at table? But I am in the midst
of you as he that serveth.to be chief among you, shall be
your servant. 45. For even the might be served, but that he
  Son of man came not that he might serve, and that he might
give his life a ransom for many. might be served, but that he
  might serve, and that he might
give his life a ransom for many.
 
 
Matthew 20:24 .And when the ten heard it.660 Luke appears to refer this dispute to a different
time. But any one who shall carefully examine that twenty-second chapter will plainly see that
discourses delivered at different times are there brought together, without any regard to order. The
dispute about the primacy, therefore which Luke mentions, flowed from this source, that the sons
of Zebedee aspired to the first places in the kingdom of Christ. And yet the displeasure of the rest
was far from being well-founded; for, while the foolish ambition of the two disciples was so severely
blamed, that they retired from Christ with disgrace, what injury was it to the other ten, that those
disciples foolishly wished what they did not obtain? 661 For though they had a good right to be
offended at the ambition of those disciples, yet when it was put down they ought to have been
satisfied. But our Lord intended to seize on this occasion for laying open a disease which was
lurking within them; for there was not one of them who would willingly yield to others, but every
one secretly cherished within himself the expectation of the primacy; in consequence of which,
they envy and dispute with one another, and yet in all there reigns wicked ambition. And if this
fault was found to be natural to uneducated men of ordinary rank, and if it broke out on a slight
occasion, and almost without any occasion at all, how much more ought we to be on our guard,
when there is abundance of fuel to feed a concealed flame? We see then how ambition springs up
in any man who has great power and honors, and sends out its flames far and wide, unless the spirit
of modesty, coming from heaven, extinguish the pride which has a firm hold of the nature of man.
25.You know that the princes of the Gentiles rule over them.  It is first said that Christ called
them to him,  that he might reprove them in private; and next we learn from it that, being ashamed
of their ambition, they did not openly complain, but that a sort of hollow murmur arose, and every
one secretly preferred himself to the rest. He does not explain generally how deadly a plague
660 “Les dix autres ayans ouy cela ;” — “ the other ten having heard that .”
661 “Avoyent follement desire une chose qu’ils n’ont peu obtenir ;” — “had foolishly desired a thing which they could not
obtain.”
263John Calvin Commentary on Matthew, Mark, Luke - Volume 2
ambition is, but simply warns them, that nothing is more foolish than to fight about nothing. 662 He
shows that the primacy, which was the occasion of dispute among them, has no existence in his
kingdom. Those persons, therefore, who extend this saying indiscriminately to all the godly are
mistaken; for Christ only takes occasion from the present occurrence to show that it is absurd in
the apostles to dispute about the degree of power and honor in their own rank, because the office
of teaching, to which they were appointed, has no resemblance to the governments of the world. I
do acknowledge that this doctrine applies both to private persons and to kings and magistrates; for
no man deserves to be reckoned one of Christ’s flock, unless he has made such proficiency under
the teacher of humility, as to claim nothing for himself, but condescend to cultivate brotherly love.
This is, no doubt, true; but the design of Christ was, as I have said, to distinguish between the
spiritual government of his Church and the empires of the world, that the apostles might not look
for the favors of a court; for in proportion as any of the nobles is loved by kings, he rises to wealth
and distinction. But Christ appoints pastors of his Church, not to rule, but to serve
This reflects the error of the Anabaptists, who exclude kings and magistrates from the Church
of God, because Christ declares 663 that they are not like his disciples; though the comparison is
here made not between Christians and ungodly men, but between the nature of their offices. Besides,
Christ did not look so much at the persons of men as at the condition of his Church. For it was
possible that one who was governor of a village or of a city might, in a case of urgent necessity,
discharge also the office of teaching; but Christ satisfied himself with explaining what belongs to
the apostolic office and what is at variance with it.
But a question arises, Why does Christ, who appointed separate orders in his Church, disown
in this passage all degrees? For he appears to throw them all down, or, at least, to place them on a
level, so that not one rises above the rest. But natural reason prescribes a very different method;
and Paul, when describing the government of the Church, ( Ephesians 4:11 ,) enumerates the various
departments of the ministry, in such a manner as to make the rank of apostleship higher than the
office of pastors. Timothy and Titus also, are unquestionably enjoined by him to exercise
authoritative superintendence over others, according to the command of God. I reply, if we carefully
examine the whole, it will be found that even kings do not rule justly or lawfully, unless they serve;
but that the apostolic office differs from earthly government in this respect, that the manner in
which kings and magistrates serve does not prevent them from governing, or indeed from rising
above their subjects in magnificent pomp and splendor. Thus David, Hezekiah, and others of the
same class, while they were the willing servants of all, used a scepter, a crown, a throne, and other
emblems of royalty. But the government of the Church admits nothing of this sort; for Christ allowed
the pastors nothing more than to be ministers, and to abstain entirely from the exercise of authority.
Here, to it ought to be observed, that the discourse relates to the thing itself rather than to the
disposition. Christ distinguishes between the apostles and the rank of kings, not because kings have
a right to act haughtily, but because the station of royalty is different from the apostolic office.
While, therefore, both ought to be humble, it is the duty of the apostles always to consider what
form of government the Lord has appointed for his Church.
662 “Qu’il n’y a point de folie plus grande, que de debattre d’une chose qui n’est point ;” — “that there is no greater folly than
to debate about a thing which does not exist.”
663 “Sous couleur de ce que Christ dit ;” — “under the pretense of what Christ says.”
264John Calvin Commentary on Matthew, Mark, Luke - Volume 2
As to the words which Matthew employs, the princes of the Gentiles rule over them, Luke
conveys the same import by saying, they are called benefactors; which means, that kings possess
great wealth and abundance, in order that they may be generous and bountiful. For though kings
have greater delight in their power, and a stronger desire that it should be formidable, than that it
should be founded in the consent of the people, still they desire the praise of munificence.664 Hence,
too, they take the name in the Hebrew language,       , (nedibim ) They are so called from bestowing
gifts;665for taxes and tributes are paid to them for no other purpose than to furnish the expense
necessary to the magnificence of their rank.
26.It shall not be so among you.  There can be no doubt that Christ refers to the foolish
imagination by which he saw that the apostles were deceived. “It is foolish and improper in you,”
he says, “to imagine a kingdom, which is unsuitable to me; and therefore, if you desire to serve me
faithfully, you must resort to a different method, which is, that each of you may strive to serve
others.” 666But whoever wishes to be great among you, let him be your servant.  These words are
employed in an unusual sense; for ambition does not allow a man to be devoted , or, rather, to be
subject to his brethren. Abject flattery, I do acknowledge, is practiced by those who aspire to honors,
but nothing is farther from their intention than to serve  But Christ’s meaning is not difficult to be
perceived. As every man is carried away by a love of himself, he declares that this passion ought
to be directed to a different object. Let the only greatness, eminence, and rank, which you desire,
be, to submit to your brethren; and let this be your primacy, to be the servants of all.
28.As the Son of man  Christ confirms the preceding doctrine by his own example; for he
voluntarily took upon himself the form of a servant , and emptied himself , as Paul also informs us,
(Philippians 2:7 .) To prove more clearly how far he was from indulging in lofty views, he reminds
them of his death. “Because I have chosen you to the honor of being near me, you are seized by a
wicked ambition to reign. But I — by whose example you ought to regulate your life — came not
to exalt myself, or to claim any royal dignity. On the contrary, I took upon me, along with the mean
and despised form of the flesh, the ignominy of the cross. If it be objected, that Christ was:
exalted by the Father, in order that every knee might bow to him,
(Philippians 2:9,10 ,)
it is easy to reply, that what he now says refers to the period of his humiliation. Accordingly,
Luke adds, that he lived among them, as if he were a servant: not that in appearance, or in name,
or in reality, he was inferior to them, (for he always wished to be acknowledged as their Master
and Lord,) but because from the heavenly glory he descended to such meekness, that he submitted
to bear their infirmities. Besides, it ought to be remembered that a comparison is here made between
the greater and the less, as in that passage,
If I, who am your Master and Lord, have washed your feet, much more ought you to perform this
service to one another,
(John 13:14 .)
And to give his life a ransom for many. Christ mentioned his death, as we have said, in order
to withdraw his disciples from the foolish imagination of an earthly kingdom. But it is a just and
664 “Toutesfois ils appetent d’avoir la louange d’estre magnifiques et liberaux ;” — “yet they desire to have the praise of being
sumptuous and liberal.”
665      (nadib ,)alvrince ,which is derived from    (nadab ,) to be bountiful, is the very word to which allusion is supposed to be
made in the passage, ( Luke 22:25 ,) where it is said that the name princes (      , nedibim ) signifies benefactors . — Ed
666 “De se rendre serviteur a ses compagnons ;” — “to become a servant to his companions.”
265John Calvin Commentary on Matthew, Mark, Luke - Volume 2
appropriate statement of its power and results, when he declares that his life is the price of our
redemption; whence it follows, that we obtain an undeserved reconciliation with God, the price of
which is to be found nowhere else than in the death of Christ. Wherefore, this single word overturns
all the idle talk of the Papists about their abominable satisfactions Again, while Christ has purchased
us by his death to be his property, this submission, of which he speaks, is so far from diminishing
his boundless glory, that it greatly increases its splendor. The word many (πολλῶν ) is not put
definitely for a fixed number, but for a large number; for he contrasts himself with all others.667
And in this sense it is used in Romans 5:15 , where Paul does not speak of any part of men, but
embraces the whole human race.
