---
layout: reading-chapter
book_id: gospel_harmony
book_title: 加尔文福音书注释
author_id: calvin
author_name: 约翰·加尔文
section: "78"
section_title: "LUKE 18:35-43"
header-img: psalm-bg-mountain.jpg
date: 2026-04-30 20:15
---

LUKE 18:35-43
Luke 18:35-43 Mark 10:46-52 Matthew 20:29-34
35. And it happened that,
while he was approaching46. And they come to
Jericho: and while they was29. And while they were
departing from Jericho, a great
Jericho, a certain blind man was departing from the city Jericho, multitude followed him.
sitting near the road begging: and his disciples, and a great 30. And, lo, two blind men
36. And when he heard a multitude, Bartimeus, son of sitting near the road, when they
multitude passing by, he asked Timeus, a blind man, was sitting heard that Jesus was passing by,
what it was. 37. And they said hear the road begging. 47. And cried aloud, saying, Have mercy
to him, that Jesus of Nazareth when he heard that it was Jesus on us, O Lord, thou Son of
was passing by. 38. And he cried of Nazareth, he began to cry David. 31. And the multitude
out, saying, Jesus, Son of David, aloud, and to say, Jesus, Son of rebuked them, that they might
have mercy on me. 39. And they David, have mercy on me. be silent; but they cried out the
that were going before rebuked 48. And many rebuked him, that more, saying, Have mercy on us,
him, that he might be silent: but he might be silent: but he cried O Lord, thou Son of David.
he cried out so much the more, out so much the more, Son of 32. And Jesus stood, and called
Son of David, have mercy on David, have mercy on me. them, and said, What do you
me. 40. And Jesus, standing still, 49. And Jesus stood, and wish that I should do to you?
commanded him to be brought commanded him to be called. 33. They say to him, Lord, that
to him: and while he was And they call the blind man, our eyes may be opened.
approaching, he asked him, saying to him, Be of good 34. And Jesus, moved with
41. Saying, What dost thou wish courage, rise; he calleth thee. compassion, touched their eyes;
that I should do to thee? And he 50. And he, throwing away his and immediately their eyes
said, Lord, that I may receive mantle, arose, and came to Jesus. received sight, and they
followed him. sight. 42. Then Jesus said to 51. And Jesus answering, saith
667 “Il prend PLUSIEURS, non pas pour quelque certain nombre, mais pour les autres: car il fait une comparaison de sa personne
a tout le reste des hommes ;” — “He takes MANY, not for any fixed number, but for the others; for he makes a comparison of
his person with all the rest of men.”
266John Calvin Commentary on Matthew, Mark, Luke - Volume 2
  him, Receive sight: thy faith
hath cured thee. 43. Andto him, What dost thou wish that
I should do to thee? And the
immediately he received sight, blind man said to him, Master,
and followed him, glorifying668 that I may receive sight. 52
God: and all the people when
they saw it, gave praise to God.And Jesus said to him, Go away;
thy faith hath cured thee. And
  immediately he received sight,
and followed Jesus in the way.
 
 
Matthew 20:29 . And while they were departing from Jericho. Osiander has resolved to display
his ingenuity by making four blind men out of one. But nothing can be more frivolous than this
supposition. Having observed that the Evangelists differ in a few expressions, he imagined that one
blind man received sight when they were entering into the city, and that the second, and other two,
received sight when Christ was departing from it. But all the circumstances agree so completely,
that no person of sound judgment will believe them to be different narratives. Not to mention other
matters, when Christ’s followers had endeavored to put the first to silence, and saw him cured
contrary to their expectation, would they immediately have made the same attempt with the other
three? But it is unnecessary to go into particulars, from which any man may easily infer that it is
one and the same event which is related.
But there is a puzzling contradiction in this respect, that Matthew and Mark say that the miracle
was performed on one or on two blind men, when Christ had already departed from the city; while
Luke relates that it was done before he came to the city. Besides, Mark and Luke speak of not more
than one blind man , while Matthew mentions two. But as we know that it frequently occurs in the
Evangelists, that in the same narrative one passes by what is mentioned by the others, and, on the
other hand, states more clearly what they have omitted, it ought not to be looked upon as strange
or unusual in the present passage. My conjecture is, that, while Christ was approaching to the city,
the blind man cried out, but that, as he was not heard on account of the noise, he placed himself in
the way, as they were departing from the city,669 and then was at length called by Christ. And so
Luke, commencing with what was true, does not follow out the whole narrative, but passes over
Christ’s stay in the city; while the other Evangelists attend only to the time which was nearer to
the miracle. There is probability in the conjecture that, as Christ frequently, when he wished to try
the faith of men, delayed for a short time to relieve them, so he subjected this blind man to the same
scrutiny.
The second difficulty may be speedily removed; for we have seen, on a former occasion, that
Mark and Luke speak of one demoniac as having been cured, while Matthew , as in the present
instance, mentions two, (Matthew 8:28 ; Mark 5:2 ; Luke 8:27670 ) And yet this involves no
contradiction between them; but it may rather be conjectured with probability, that at first one blind
668 “Rabboni;” — “ Maistre .”
669 “Mais pource qu’il ne peut estre ouy a cause du bruit du peuple, qu’il s’en alla, l’autre porte de la ville par laquelle Christ
devoit sortir, pour l’attendre la au chemin ;” — “but, because he could not be heard on account of the noise of the people, that
he went away to the other gate by which Christ was to go out, to wait for him there on the road.”
670 See Harmony , vol. 1 p. 428 .
267John Calvin Commentary on Matthew, Mark, Luke - Volume 2
man implored the favor of Christ, and that another was excited by his example, and that in this way
two persons received sight  Mark and Luke speak of one only, either because he was better known,
or because in him the demonstration of Christ’s power was not less remarkable than it was in both.
It certainly appears to have been on account of his having been extensively known that he was
selected by Mark , who gives both his own name and that of his father: Bartimeus, son of Timeus
By doing so, he does not claim for him either illustrious descent or wealth; for he was a beggar of
the lowest class. Hence it appears that the miracle was more remarkable in his person, because his
calamity had been generally known. This appears to me to be the reason why Mark and Luke
mention him only, and say nothing about the other, who was a sort of inferior appendage. But
Matthew , who was an eye-witness, 671 did not choose to pass by even this person, though less known.
30. Have mercy on me, O Lord.  I stated, a little ago, that there was at first but one who cried
out, but the other was induced by a similar necessity to join him. They confer on Christ no ordinary
honor, when they request him to have mercy , and relieve them; for they must have been convinced
that he had in his power the assistance or remedy which they needed. But their faith is still more
clearly exhibited by their acknowledgment of him as Messiah, to whom we know that the Jews
gave this designation, Son of David  They therefore apply to Christ, not only as some Prophet, but
as that person whom God had promised to be the only Author of salvation. The cry proved the
ardor of the desire; for, though they knew that what they said exposed them to the hatred of many,
who were highly displeased with the honor done to Christ, their fear was overcome by the ardor
of desire, so that they did not refrain, on this account, from raising their voice aloud.
31. And the multitude reproved them.  It is surprising that the disciples of Christ, who follow
him through a sense of duty and of respect, should wish to drive wretched men from the favor of
Christ, and, so far as lies in them, to prevent the exercise of his power. But it frequently happens
that the greater part of those who profess the name of Christ, instead of inviting us to him, rather
hinder or delay our approach. If Satan endeavored to throw obstacles in the way of two blind men ,
by means of pious and simple persons, who were induced by some sentiments of religion to follow
Christ, how much more will he succeed in accomplishing it by means of hypocrites and traitors, if
we be not strictly on our guard. Perseverance is therefore necessary to overcome every difficulty,
and the more numerous the obstacles are which Satan throws in the way, the more powerfully ought
we to be excited to earnestness in prayer, as we see that the blind men redoubled their cry
32. What do you wish that I should do to you?  He gently and kindly asks what they desire; for
he had determined to grant their requests. There is no reason to doubt that they prayed by a special
movement of the Holy Spirit; for, as the Lord does not intend to grant to all persons deliverance
from bodily diseases, so neither does he permit them simply to pray for it. A rule has been prescribed
for us what we ought to ask, and in what manner, and to what extent; and we are not at liberty to
depart from that rule, unless the Lord, by a secret movement of the Spirit, suggest to us some special
prayer, which rarely happens. Christ puts the question to them, not for their sake as individuals,
but for the sake of all the people; for we know how the world swallows God’s benefits without
perceiving them, unless they are stimulated and aroused. Christ, therefore, by his voice, awakens
the assembled crowd to observe the miracle, as he awakens them shortly afterwards by a visible
sign, when he opens their eyes by touching them.
671 “Qui avoit este present au miracle ;” — “who had been present at the miracle.”
268John Calvin Commentary on Matthew, Mark, Luke - Volume 2
34. And Jesus, moved with compassion, etc. Σπλαγχνισθείς , moved with compassion ,is not the
participle of the same verb which Matthew had just now employed in reference to the blind man,
ἐλέησον ,have mercy672They implored the mercy of Christ, that he might relieve their wretchedness;
but now the Evangelist expresses that Christ was induced to cure them, not only by undeserved
goodness, but because he pitied their distress. For the metaphor is taken from the bowels ,(σπλάγχνα ,)
in which dwells that kindness and mutual compassion which prompts us to assist our neighbors.
Mark 10:52 .Thy faith hath saved thee  By the word  faith  is meant not only a confident hope
of recovering sight, but a loftier conviction, which was, that this blind man had acknowledged Jesus
to be the Messiah whom God had promised. Nor must we imagine that it was only some confused
knowledge; for we have already seen that this confession was taken from the Law and the Prophets.
For the blind man did not at random bestow on Christ the name of Son of David , but embraced him
as that person whose coming he had been taught by the divine predictions to expect. Now Christ
attributes it to faith that the blind man received sight;  for, though the power and grace of God
sometimes extend even to unbelievers, yet no man enjoys His benefits in a right and profitable
manner, unless he receive them by faith; nay, the use of the gifts of God is so far from being
advantageous to unbelievers, that it is even hurtful. And therefore, when Christ says, thy faith hath
saved thee,  the word saved is not limited to an outward cure,but includes also the health and safety
of the soul; as if Christ had said, that by faith the blind man obtained that God was gracious to him,
and granted his wish. And if it was in regard to faith that God bestowed his favor on the blind man,
it follows that he was justified by faith
Matthew 20:34 . And followed him.  This was an expression of gratitude, 673 when the blind men
became followers of Christ; for, though it is uncertain how long they discharged this duty, yet it
showed a grateful mind, that they presented themselves to many, in that journey, as mirrors of the
grace of Christ. Luke adds, that the people gave praise to God,  which tends to prove the certainty
of the miracle.
