---
layout: reading-chapter
book_id: gospel_harmony
book_title: 加尔文福音书注释
author_id: calvin
author_name: 约翰·加尔文
section: "80"
section_title: "MATTHEW 25:14-30 ； LUKE 19:11-28"
header-img: psalm-bg-mountain.jpg
date: 2026-04-30 20:15
---

MATTHEW 25:14-30 ; LUKE 19:11-28
Luke 19:11-28 Matthew 25:14-30
11. While they were hearing these things, he
added, and spoke a parable, because he was near14. For as a certain man, setting out on a
journey, called his servants, and delivered to them
681 “Le translateur Latin ancien ;” — “the old Latin translator.”
682The question is, whether the antecedent to αὐτός  be Ζακχαῖος  or ὁ οἴκος . On the former supposition, our English version
will be approved HE also (namely, Zaccheus) is a son of Abraham On the latter supposition, the translation will run thus: IT
also (namely, the house) is a child of Abraham; or — carrying out the metaphor as Erasmus has done — IT  also is a DAUGHTER
of Abraham . — Ed
683 “Eo quod ipsu domus sit filia Abrahae .”
272John Calvin Commentary on Matthew, Mark, Luke - Volume 2
his goods. 15. And to one he gave five talents,
and to another two, and to another one; to everyJerusalem, and because they thought that the
kingdom of God would immediately be revealed.
one according to his own ability; and immediately 12. He said therefore, A certain nobleman set out
set out. 16. And he who had received five talents for a distant country, to receive for himself a
went away and traded with them, and amassed kingdom, 684 and to return. 13. And, having called
other five talents. 17. And likewise he who hadhis ten servants, he gave to them ten pounds, and
received two, he also gained other two. 18. But said to them, Trade till I come. 14. And his
he who had received one went away, and dug incitizens hated him, and sent a message after him,
the earth, and hid his master’s money. 19. And saying, We will not have this man to reign over
after a long time the master of those servant us. 15. And it happened that he returned, after
cometh, and reckoneth with them. 20. And hehaving obtained the kingdom, 685 and commanded
who had received five talents, saying, Master, those servants to be called to him, to whom he
thou deliveredst to me five talents: lo, I have had given money, that he might know how much
gained by them other five talents. 21. His master everyone had gained by trading. 16. And the first
saith to him, Well done, good and faithful came, saying, Master, thy pound hath gained ten
servant; thou has tbeen faithful over a few things, pounds. 17. And he said to him, Well done, good
I will place thee over many things: enter thou servant; because thou hast been faithful in a very
into the joy of thy master. 22. And he also who small matter, have though power over ten cities.
had received two talents came, and said, Master, 18. And another came, saying, Master, thy pound
thou deliveredst to me two talents: lo, I have hath gained five pounds. 19. And he said to him,
gained by them other two. 23. His master saith And be thou ruler over five cities. 20. And
to him, Well done, good and faithful servant; thou another came, saying, Master, lo, thy pound,
hast been faithful over a few things: enter thou which I have kept laid up in a napkin: 21. For I
into the joy of thy master. 24. But he who hadfeared thee, because thou art a harsh man: thou
received one talent came and said, Master, knew takest up what thou didst not lay down, and
thee that thou art a harsh man, reaping where thou reapest what thou didst not sow. 22. He saith to
didst not sow, and gathering where didst nothim, Out of thy mouth will I judge thee, wicked
scatter: 25. And, being afraid, I went away, andservant. Thou knewest that I am a harsh man,
hid thy talent in the earth: lo, thou hast what istaking up what I did not lay down, and reaping
thine. 26. And his master answering said to him, what I did not sow: 23. And why didst not thou
Wicked and slothful servant, thou knowest thatgive my money to the bank, and, when I came, I
I reap where I sowed not, and gather where I didwould have demanded it with usury? 24. And to
not scatter: 27. Thou oughtest therefore to have those who stood by he said, Take from him the
given my money to the bankers, and, when Ipound, and give it to him who hath ten pounds.
came, I would have received my own with usury. 25. And they said to him, Master, he hath ten
28. Take away then from him the talent, and give pounds. 26. For I say to you, That to him that
it to him who hath ten talents. 29. For to every hath it shall be given; but from him who hath not,
one that hath shall be given, and he shall abound; even what he hath shall be taken away. 27. But
but he that hath not, even that which he hath shall bring hither those my enemies, who refused that
be taken from him. 30. And cast out theI should reign over them, and slay them before
684 “Pour conquester un royaurae ;” — “to conquer a kingdom.”
685 “Apres avoir conqueste le royaume ;” — “after having conquered the kingdom.”
273John Calvin Commentary on Matthew, Mark, Luke - Volume 2
me. 28. And, having said these things, he went
before, to go up to Jerusalem.unprofitable servant into outer darkness, where
shall be weeping and gnashing of teeth.
   
 
Luke 19:11 .While they were hearing these things.  It was next to a prodigy that the disciples,
after having been so frequently warned as to the approaching death of Christ, flew aside from it to
think of his kingdom. There were two mistakes; first, that they pictured to themselves rest and
happiness without the cross; secondly, that they judged of the kingdom of God according to their
own carnal sense. Hence it appears how slight and obscure their faith was; for though they had
entertained a hope of the resurrection, yet the taste was too slight for forming a fixed and decided
opinion about Christ. They believe him to be the Redeemer who had been formerly promised, and
hence they conceive a hope that the Church will be renewed; but that knowledge immediately
degenerates into vain imaginations, which either overturn or obscure the power of his kingdom.
But the strangest thing of all was, that so many warnings should have passed away from their
recollection without yielding any advantage. At least, it was brutal stupidity that, though Christ
had lately declared, in express terms, that he was just about to undergo a bitter and ignominious
death, they not only remained unconcerned, but rushed forward, as if to a joyful triumph.
12.A certain nobleman. Matthew interweaves this parable with others, without attending to the
order of time; but, as his intention was, in the twenty-second chapter, to make a collection of Christ’s
latest discourses, readers ought not to trouble themselves greatly with the inquiry which of them
was delivered on the first, or the second, or the third day within that short period. But it is proper
to observe the difference between Matthew and Luke; for, while the former touches only on one
point, the latter embraces two. This point is common to both, that Christ resembles a nobleman ,
who, undertaking a long journey for the sake of obtaining a kingdom , has entrusted his money to
the management of his servants , and so on. The other point is peculiar to Luke, that the subjects
abused the absence of the prince, and raised a tumult in order to shake off his yoke. In both parts
Christ intended to show, that the disciples were greatly mistaken in supposing that his royal authority
was already established, and that he was coming to Jerusalem , in order to commence immediately
a course of prosperity. Thus by taking away the expectation of an immediate kingdom, he exhorts
them to hope and patience; for he tells them that they must long and steadily endure many toils,
before they enjoy that glory for which they pant too earnestly.
Into a distant country.  As the disciples thought that Christ was now about to enter into the
possession of his kingdom, he first corrects this mistake by informing them, that he must undertake
a long journey , in order to obtain the kingdom686 As to what is meant by the distant country , I leave
it to the ingenious expositions of those who are fond of subtleties. For my own part, I think that
Christ expresses nothing more than his long absence, which would extend from the time of his
death to his last coming. For, though he sits at the right hand of the Father, and holds the government
of heaven and earth, and though, from the time that he ascended to heaven, all power was given to
him, (Matthew 28:18 ,) that every knee might bow before him , (Philippians 2:10 ;) yet as he has not
yet subdued his enemies — has not yet appeared as Judge of the world, or revealed his majesty —
it is not without propriety that he is said to be absent from his people, till he return again, clothed
686 “Pour conquester ce royaurae ;” — “to conquer this kingdom.’
274John Calvin Commentary on Matthew, Mark, Luke - Volume 2
with his new sovereignty. It is true, indeed, that he now reigns, while he regenerates his people to
the heavenly life, forms them anew to the image of God, and associates them with angels; while
he governs the Church by his word, guards it by his protection, enriches it with the gifts of the
Spirit, nourishes it by his grace, and maintains it by his power, and, in short, supplies it with all
that is necessary for salvation; while he restrains the fury of Satan and of all the ungodly, and defeats
all their schemes. But as this way of reigning is concealed from the flesh, his manifestation is
properly said to be delayed till the last day. Since, therefore, the apostles foolishly aimed at the
shadow of a kingdom, our Lord declares that he must go to seek a distant kingdom, that, they may
learn to endure delay. 687
13.And having called his ten servants.  We must not inquire anxiously into the number of the
servants, or into the sums of money. For Matthew, by expressing various sums, includes a more
extensive doctrine, namely, that Christ does not lay on all an equal charge of trafficking, but commits
to one a small, and to another a larger sum of money. Both agree in this, that till the last day of the
resurrection Christ, in some respects, goes to a distance from his people, but yet that it would be
highly improper for them to sit down in idleness and do no good; for each has a certain office
enjoined him, in which he ought to be employed, and, therefore, they ought to be diligent in trading ,
that they may be careful to increase their Lord’s property.
Luke says simply, that to each he gave a pound; because, whether more or less may be committed
to us by our Lord, every man must equally give account for himself. Matthew, as I have said, is
more full and copious; for he states various degrees. Let us know that the Lord does not bestow on
all indiscriminately the same measure of gifts , (Ephesians 4:7 ,) but
distributes them variously as he thinks proper,
(1 Corinthians 12:11 ,)
so that some excel others. But whatever gifts the Lord has bestowed upon us, let us know that
it is committed to us as so much money, that it may yield some gain; for nothing could be more
unreasonable than that we should allow to remain buried, or should apply to no use, God’s favors,
the value of which consists in yielding fruit.
Matthew 25:15 .To every one according to his own ability.  By this term Christ does not
distinguish between natural gifts and the gifts of the Spirit; for we have neither power nor skill 688
which ought not to be acknowledged as having been received from God; and, therefore, whoever
shall determine to give God his share will leave nothing for himself. What then is meant by saying,
that the master of the house gives to each person more or less, according to his own ability? It is
because God, as he has assigned to every one his place, and has bestowed on him natural gifts,
gives him also this or the other injunction, employs him in the management of affairs, raises him
to various offices, furnishes him with abundant means of eminent usefulness, and presents to him
the opportunity.
It is absurd, however, in the Papists to infer from this, that the gifts of God are conferred on
every man according to the measure which he deserves. For, though the old translator,689 employed
the word virtus ,690he did not mean that God bestows his gifts, according as men have acquitted
687 “Qu’ils apprenent de porter patiemment la longue attente ;” — “that they may learn to endure patiently the long delay.”
688 “Il n’y a ne puissance, ne industrie, ou dexterit ;” — “there is neither power, nor industry, nor skill.”
689 “Le translateur Latin ancien ;” — “the old Latin translator.”
690 An interpreter who was willing to twist a passage, so as to bring out of it any meaning that he chose, would find the vagueness
of the Latin word virtus  to be well suited to his purpose. Its derivation from vir, a man, shows that it originally signified manliness ,
275John Calvin Commentary on Matthew, Mark, Luke - Volume 2
themselves well, and obtained the praise of virtue ,but only so far as the master of the house has
judged them to be suitable. Now we know that no man is found by God to be suitable till He has
made him so; and the Greek word δύναμις , (power , ability ,) which Christ employed, is free from
all ambiguity.
20.And he who had received five talents.  Those who employ usefully whatever God has
committed to them are said to be engaged in trading  The life of the godly, 691 is justly compared to
trading , for they ought naturally to exchange and barter with each other, in order to maintain
intercourse; and the industry with which every mall discharges the office assigned him, the calling
itself, the power of acting properly, and other gifts, are reckoned to be so many kinds of merchandise;
because the use or object which they have in view is, to promote mutual intercourse among men.
Now the gain which Christ mentions is general usefulness, 692 which illustrates the glory of
God. For, though God is not enriched, and makes no gain, by our labors, yet when every one is
highly profitable to his brethren, and applies advantageously, for their salvation, the gifts which he
has received from God, he is said to yield profit , or gain, to God himself. So highly does our
heavenly Father value the salvation of men, that whatever contributes to it he chooses to place to
his own account. That we may not become weary in doing well , (Galatians 6:9 ,) Christ declares
that the labor of those who are faithfully employed in their calling will not be useless.
According to Luke , he says that he who gained five pounds obtains the government of five cities;
by which words he informs them, that the glory of his kingdom will be very different at his last
coming from what it now appears. For now 693 we have labor and anxiety in managing, as it were,
the affairs of an absent master; but then he will have at his command an ample and copious supply
of honors, to ennoble and enrich us. The form of expression employed by Matthew is more simple,
Enter thou into the joy of thy master; by which he means that faithful servants, whose discharge
of duty shall meet with his approbation, will share with himself a blessed abundance of all good
things.
But it is asked, What is meant by what is added, Take from him the talent, and give it to him
who hath ten talents? For every kind of trading will then be at an end. I reply, We ought to keep
in remembrance what I formerly mentioned, that those who insist on explaining, with exactness,
every minute phrase, are mistaken. The true meaning is, though slothful and unprofitable servants
are now endued with the gifts of the Spirit, yet they will at length be deprived of them all, that their
wretched and shameful poverty may redound to the glory of the good. Now these slothful persons,
Christ tells us, hide either the talent or the pound in the earth; because, while they consult their
own ease and gratifications, they refuse to submit to any uneasiness; as we see very many who,
while they are privately devoted to themselves and to their own advantage, avoid all the duties of
charity, and have no regard to the general edification. When it is said that the master of the house,
after his return, called the servants to account; as this ought to impart courage to the good, when
from which it easily passed to denote courage , and, from the high estimation in which courage was held among warlike nations,
became the general expression for moral excelle nce, out of which arose the application of it to other kinds of excellence , as in
the phrase, virtutes orationis , the ornaments of style . Again, from denoting manly vigor it came naturally to denote ability; and
it is undoubtedly in this sense, with which our English version accords, that rirtus  is employed by the Vulgate in this passage.
— Ed.
691 “Des fideles ;” — “of believers.”
692 “C’est le profit ou l’avancement de toute la compagnie des fideles en commun ;” — “it is the profit or advancement of the
whole company of believers in common.”
693 “En ce monde ;” — “in this world.”
276John Calvin Commentary on Matthew, Mark, Luke - Volume 2
they understand that they do not lose their pains, so the indolent and careless, on the other hand,
ought to be struck with no small terror. Let us therefore learn to call ourselves daily to account,
before the Lord come, and make a reckoning with us.
24.I knew thee, that thou art a harsh man.  This harshness has nothing to do with the substance
of the parable; and it is an idle speculation in which those indulge, who reason from this passage,
how severely and rigorously God deals with his own people. For Christ did not intend to describe
such rigor , any more than to applaud usury , when he represents the master of the house as saying,
that the money ought to have been deposited with a banker , that it might, at least, gain interest
Christ only means, that there will be no excuse for the indolence of those who both conceal the
gifts of God, and waste their time in idleness. Hence also we infer that no manner of life is more
praiseworthy in the sight of God, than that which yields some advantage to human society.
29.To every one that hath shall be given  has been explained 694 under Matthew 13:12
30.And cast the unprofitable servant into outer darkness. We have also explained, 695 under
Matthew 8:12 , that outer darkness is contrasted with the light which is within the house; 696 for, as
banquets were anciently held, for the most part, at night, and were illuminated by numerous torches
and lamps, of those who are banished from the kingdom of God, Christ says, that they are cast
without into darkness
Luke 19:27 .But those my enemies  In this second part, he appears to glance principally at the
Jews, but includes all who in the absence of their master, determine to revolt. Now Christ’s intention
was, not only to terrify such persons by threatening an awful punishment, but also to keep his own
people in faithful subjection; for it was no small temptation to see the kingdom of God scattered
by the treachery and rebellion of many. In order then that we may preserve our composure in the
midst of troubles, Christ informs us that he will return, and that at his coming he will punish wicked
rebellion. 697
