---
layout: reading-chapter
book_id: gospel_harmony
book_title: 加尔文福音书注释
author_id: calvin
author_name: 约翰·加尔文
section: "9"
section_title: "MATTHEW 12:1-8 ； MARK 2:23-28 ； LUKE 6:1-5"
header-img: psalm-bg-mountain.jpg
date: 2026-04-30 20:15
---

MATTHEW 12:1-8 ; MARK 2:23-28 ; LUKE 6:1-5
Luke 6:1-5 Mark 2:23-28 Matthew 12:1-8
1. And it happened that, on
the second-first Sabbath, he was23. And it happened, that he
was passing through the1. At that time Jesus was
passing through the corn-fields
passing through the cornfields; corn-fields, and his disciples on the Sabbath; 73 and his
and his disciples were plucking began to pluck the ears of corn disciples were hungry, and
ears of corn, and were eating, as they went along. 24. And the began to pluck the ears of corn,
rubbing them in their hands. Pharisees said to him, Lo, why and to eat. 2. But when the
2. And some of the Pharisees do they on the Sabbath what is Pharisees saw it, they said to
said to them, Why do you do not lawful? 25. And he said to him, Lo, thy disciples do what
what it is not lawful to do on the them, Have you not read what it is not lawful to do on the
Sabbath? 3. And Jesus David did, when he had need, Sabbath. 3. But he said to them,
answering saith to them, Have and was hungry, and those who Have you not read what David
you not read even this which were with him? 26. How he did, when he was hungry, and
David did when he was hungry, entered into the house of God in those who were with him?
and those who were with him? the time of Abiathar, the 4. How he entered into the house
4. How he entered into the house high-priest, and ate the of God, and ate the shew-bread,
of God, and took the shew-bread, which it is not which it was not lawful for him
shew-bread, and ate it, and gave lawful to eat but for the priests, to eat, nor for those who were
also to those who were with him, and gave also 75 to those who with him, but for the priests
which it is not lawful to eat but were with him? 27. And he said alone? 5. Or have you not read
only for the priests? 5. And he to them, The Sabbath was made in the Law, that on the Sabbath
said to them, The Son of man is
Lord even of the Sabbath.for man, and not man for the
Sabbath. 28. Therefore the Sonthe priests in the temple profane
the temple, and are free from
  of man is Lord even of the
Sabbath.blame? 746. But I say to you,
That one greater than the temple
  is in this place. 7. But if you
knew what that is, I choose
73 “Un iour du Sabbath ;” — “on a Sabbath-day.”
75 “Et en donna aussi ;” — “and gave of it also.”
74 “Et n’en sont point reprehensibles ;” — “and are not blameable for it.”
26John Calvin Commentary on Matthew, Mark, Luke - Volume 2
mercy, and not sacrifice, you
would not have condemned the
innocent. 8. For the Son of man
is Lord even of the Sabbath.
 
 
Matthew 12:1 .Jesus was walking on the Sabbath  It was the design of the Evangelists, in this
history, to show partly what a malicious disposition the Pharisees had, and partly how superstitiously
they were attached to outward and slight matters, so as to make holiness to consist in them entirely.
They blame the disciples of Christ for plucking the ears of corn on the Sabbath, during their journey,
when they were pressed with hunger, as if, by so doing, they were violating the Sabbath. The
keeping of the Sabbath was, indeed, a holy thing, but not such a manner of keeping it as they
imagined, so that one could scarcely move a finger without making the conscience to tremble. 76 It
was hypocrisy, therefore, that made them so exact in trifling matters, while they spared themselves
in gross superstitions; as Christ elsewhere upbraids them with
paying tithe of mint and anise, and neglecting the
important matters of the Law, ( Matthew 23:23 .)
It is the invariable practice of hypocrites to allow themselves liberty in matters of the greatest
consequence, and to pay close attention to ceremonial observances. Another reason why they
demand that outward rites should be more rigorously observed is, that they wish to make their duty
toward God to consist only in carnal worship. But it was malevolence and envy, still more than
superstition, that led them to this act of censure; for towards others they would not have been equally
stern. It is proper for us to observe the feelings by which they were animated, lest any one should
be distressed by the fact, that the very Doctors of the Law were so hostile to Christ.
Luke 6:1 .On the second-first Sabbath  It is beyond all question that this Sabbath belonged to
some one of the festival-days which the Law enjoined to be observed once every year. Some have
thought that there were two festival-days in immediate succession; but as the Jews had arranged
their festival-days after the Babylonish captivity so that one day always intervened between them,
that opinion is set aside. Others maintain with greater probability, that it was the last day of the
solemnity, which was as numerously attended as the first. I am more inclined to favor those who
understand by it the second festivity in the year; and this agrees exceedingly well with the name
given to it, the second-first Sabbath, because, among the great Sabbaths which were annually
observed, it was the second in the order of time. Now the first was the Passover, and it is therefore
probable that this was the feast of first-fruits, (Exodus 23:15, 16 .)
Mark 2:24 .Why do they on the Sabbath what is not lawful?  The Pharisees do not blame the
disciples of Christ for plucking ears of corn  from a field that was not their own, but for violating
the Sabbath; as if there had been a precept to this effect, that famishing men ought rather to die
than to satisfy their hunger. Now the only reason for keeping the Sabbath was, that the people, by
sanctifying themselves to God, might be employed in true and spiritual worship; and next, that,
being free from all worldly occupations, they might be more at liberty to attend the holy assemblies.
The lawful observation of it, therefore, must have a reference to this object; for the Law ought to
76 “Avec tremblement et incertitude de conscience ;” — “with trembling and uncertainty of conscience.”
27John Calvin Commentary on Matthew, Mark, Luke - Volume 2
be interpreted according to the design of the Legislator. But this shows clearly the malicious and
implacable nature of superstition, and particularly the proud and cruel dispositions of hypocrites,
when ambition is joined to hatred of the person. It was not the mere affectation of pretended holiness,
as I have said, that made the Pharisees so stern and rigorous; but as they expressly wished to carp
at every thing that Christ said or did, they could not do otherwise than put a wrong meaning in
cases where there was nothing to blame, as usually happens with prejudiced interpreters. The
accusation was brought—according to Matthew and Mark—against our Lord, and—according to
Luke—against his disciples. But there is no inconsistency here; for the disciples were in all
probability so harassed, that the charge was directed chiefly against the Master himself. It is even
possible that the Pharisees first wrangled with the disciples, and afterwards with Christ, and that,
in the rage of their malice, they blamed him for remaining silent, and permitting his disciples to
break the Sabbath.
Matthew 12:3 .Have you not read what David did?  Christ employs five arguments to refute
their calumny. First, he apologizes for his disciples by pleading the example of David, (1 Samuel
21:6.) While David was fleeing from the rage of Saul, he applied for provisions to the high-priest
Ahimelech; and there being no ordinary food at hand, he succeeded in obtaining a part of the holy
bread. If David’s necessity excused him, the same argument ought to be admitted in the case of
others. Hence it follows, that the ceremonies of the Law are not violated where there is no
infringement of godliness. 77 Now Christ takes for granted, that David was free from blame, because
the Holy Spirit bestows commendation on the priest who allowed him to partake of the holy bread.
When he says, that it was not lawful to eat that bread but for the priests alone, we must understand
him to refer to the ordinary law:
they shall eat those things wherewith the atonement was made,
to consecrate and to sanctify them; but a stranger shall not
eat thereof, because they are holy, ( Exodus 29:33 .)
If David had attempted to do what was contrary to law, it would have been in vain for Christ
to plead his example; for what had been prohibited for a particular end no necessity could make
lawful.
5.That on the Sabbaths the priests profane the Sabbath.  This is the second argument by which
Christ proves that the violation of the Sabbath, of which the Pharisees complained, was free from
all blame; because on the Sabbaths it is lawful to slay beasts for sacrifice, to circumcise infants,
and to do other things relating to the worship of God. Hence it follows, that the duties of piety are
in no degree inconsistent with each other. 78 But if the temple sanctifies manual operations connected
with sacrifices, and with the whole of the outward service, the holiness of the true and spiritual
temple has greater efficacy, in exempting its worshippers from all blame, while they are discharging
the duties of godliness. 79 Now the object which the disciples had in view was, to present to God
souls which were consecrated by the Gospel.
77 “Quand on ne derogue rien a la reverence deue, a Dieu ;” — “when nothing is taken away from the reverence that is due to
God.”
78 “Que les exercices de piete ne sont point contraires les uns aux autres, mais s’accordent bien ensemble ;” — “that the
exercises of godliness are not opposed to each other, but agree well together.”
79 “Quand ils s’employent a oeuvres qui tendent a l’honneur de Dieu ;” — “when they are employed in works which tend to
the honor of God.”
28John Calvin Commentary on Matthew, Mark, Luke - Volume 2
Matthew alone glances at this argument. When Christ says, that the priests Profane the Sabbath,
the expression is not strictly accurate, and is accommodated to his hearers; for when the Law enjoins
men to abstain from their employments, it does not forbid them to perform the services of religion.
But Christ admits that to be true which might appear to be so in the eye of ignorant persons, 80 and
rests satisfied with proving, that the labors performed in the temple are not offensive to God.
7.But if you knew  This Third argument is also mentioned by Matthew alone. Christ conveys
an indirect reproof to the Pharisees, for not considering why ceremonies were appointed, and to
what object they are directed. This has been a common fault in almost every age; and therefore the
prophet Hosea ( 6:6) exclaims against the men of his own age for being too much attached to
ceremonies, and caring little about the duties of kindness. But God declares aloud, that he sets a
higher value on mercy than on sacrifice, employing the word mercy, by a figure of speech, for
offices of kindness, as sacrifices include the outward service of the Law. This statement Christ
applies to his own time, and charges the Pharisees with wickedly torturing the Law of God out of
its true meaning, with disregarding the second table, and being entirely occupied with ceremonies.
But a question arises: Why does God declare that he is indifferent about ceremonies, when he
strictly enjoined in his Law that they should be observed? The answer is easy. External rites are of
no value in themselves, and are demanded by God in so far only as they are directed to their proper
object. Besides, God does not absolutely reject them, but, by a comparison with deeds of kindness,
pronounces that they are inferior to the latter in actual value. Nor is it inconsistent with this to say,
that in the perfection of righteousness the highest rank belongs to the worship of God, and the duties
which men owe to each other occupy the second rank. For, though piety is justly reckoned to be
as much superior to charity as God is higher than men, yet as believers, by practicing justice towards
each other, prove that their service of God is sincere, it is not without reason that this subject is
brought under the notice of hypocrites, who imitate piety by outward signs, and yet pervert it by
confining their laborious efforts to the carnal worship alone. 81 From the testimony of the Prophet,
Christ justly infers that no blame attaches to his disciples; for while God trained his people in the
rudiments of the Law, it was far from being his design to kill wretched men with famine.
8.For the Son of man is Lord even of the Sabbath.  Some connect this sentence with a preceding
statement, that one greater than the temple is in this place, (ver. 6 ;) but I look upon them as different.
In the former case, Christ, by an allusion to the temple, affirmed that whatever was connected with
his personal holiness was not a transgression of the Law; but now, he declares that he has received
authority to exempt his followers from the necessity of observing the Sabbath. The Son of man, (he
says,) in the exercise of his authority, can relax the Sabbath in the same manner as other legal
ceremonies. And certainly out of Christ the bondage of the Law is wretched, from which he alone
delivers those on whom he bestows the free Spirit of adoption,82 (Romans 8:15 .)
80 “Ainsi Christ accorde estre vray, ce qui ne l’est pas de faict, mais qui pourroit sembler l’estre en apparence a gens qui ne
scavent pas bien iuger et discerner les choses ;” — “thus Christ admits that to be true which is not so in reality, but which might
appear to be so to persons who do not know how to judge and distinguish matters properly.”
81 “Et cependant neantmoins la renversent et falsifient, s’arrestans au seul service charnel, auquel ils prenent grande peine ;”
— “and yet nevertheless overthrow and falsify it, confining themselves to the carnal service alone, on which they bestow great
pains.”
82 “Ausquels il donne l’Esprit d’adoption, qui est l’Esprit de la liberte ;” — “to whom he gives the Spirit of adoption which is
the Spirit of liberty.”
29John Calvin Commentary on Matthew, Mark, Luke - Volume 2
Mark 2:27 .The Sabbath was made for man.  This Fifth argument is related by Mark alone. The
general meaning is, that those persons judge amiss who turn to man’s destruction, 83 the Sabbath
which God appointed for his benefit. The Pharisees saw the disciples of Christ employed in a holy
work; they saw them worn out with the fatigue of the journey, and partly with want of food; and
yet are offended that, when they are hungry, they take a few grains of corn for the support of their
wearied bodies. Is not this a foolish attempt to overturn the purpose of God, when they demand to
the injury of men that observation of the Sabbath which he intended to be advantageous? But they
are mistaken, I think, who suppose that in this passage the Sabbath is entirely abolished; for Christ
simply informs us what is the proper use of it. Though he asserted, a little before, that he is Lord
of the Sabbath, yet the full time for its abolition 84 was not yet come, because the veil of the temple
was not yet rent, (Matthew 27:51 .)
