---
layout: calvin-chapter
book_id: titus
book_name: 提多书
chapter: 1
section: "1"
section_title: "第1章"
sections_list: "dedication,introduction,1,2,3"
total_chapters: 3
header-img: psalm-bg-mountain.jpg
date: 2026-04-30 20:25
---

CHAPTER 1
Titus 1:1-4
1. Paulus servus Dei apostolus autem Iesu
Christi secundum fidem electorum Dei et
agnitionem veritatis quae secundum pietatem est1. Paul, a servant of God, and an apostle of
Jesus Christ, according to the faith of God’s elect,
and the acknowledging of the truth which is after
godliness;
2. in spem vitae aeternae quam promisit qui
non mentitur Deus ante tempora saecularia2. In hope of eternal life, which God, that
cannot lie, promised before the world began;
3. manifestavit autem temporibus suis verbum
suum in praedicatione quae credita est mihi
secundum praeceptum salvatoris nostri Dei3. But hath in due time manifested his word
through preaching, which is committed unto me
according to the commandment of God our
Saviour;
4. Tito dilecto filio secundum communem
fidem gratia et pax a Deo Patre et Christo Iesu
salvatore nostro4. To Titus, mine  own son after the common
faith: Grace, mercy, and peace, from God the
Father and the Lord Jesus Christ our Saviour.
1.A servant of God  This extended and laborious commendation of his apostleship shows that
Paul had in view the whole Church, and not Titus alone; for his apostleship was not disputed by
Titus, and Paul is in the habit of proclaiming the titles of his calling, in order to maintain his
authority. Accordingly, just as he perceives those to whom he writes to be disposed, he deals largely
or sparingly in those ornaments. Here his design was, to bring into subjection those who had
haughtily rebelled; and for this reason he extols his apostleship in lofty terms. He therefore writes
this Epistle, not that it may be read in solitude by Titus in his closet, but that it may be openly
published.
An Apostle of Jesus Christ  First, he calls himself “a servant of God,” and next adds the particular
kind of his ministry, namely, that he is “an Apostle of Christ;” for there are various ranks among
the servants of God. Thus he descends from the general description to the particular class. We ought
also to keep in remembrance what I have said elsewhere, that the word servant means something
else than ordinary subjection, (on account of which all believers are called “servants of God,”) and
denotes a minister who has received a particular office. In this sense the prophets were formerly
distinguished by this title, and Christ himself is the chief of the prophets:
“Behold my servant, I have chosen him.” ( Isaiah 42:1 .)
Thus David, with a view to his royal dignity calls himself “a servant of God.” Perhaps, also, it
is on account of the Jews that he designates himself “a servant of God;” for they were wont to lower
his authority by alleging the law against him. He therefore wishes to be accounted an Apostle of
Christ in such a manner that he may likewise glory in being a servant of the eternal God. Thus he
shows not only that those two titles are quite consistent with each other, but that they are joined by
a bond which cannot be dissolved.
According to the faith of the elect of God209 If any one doubt about his apostleship, he procures
credit for it by a very strong reason, connecting it with the salvation “of the elect of God.” As if he
had said, “There is a mutual agreement between my apostleship and the faith of the elect of God;
and, therefore, it will not be rejected by any man who is not a reprobate and opposed to the true
faith.”
By “the elect” he means not only those who were at that time alive, but all that had been from
the beginning of the world; for he declares that he teaches no doctrine which does not agree with
the faith of Abraham and of all the fathers. So, then, if any person in the present day wishes to be
accounted a successor of Paul, he must prove that he is the minister of the same doctrine. But these
words contain also an implied contrast, that the gospel may suffer no damage from the unbelief
and obstinacy of many; for at that time, as well as in the present day, weak minds were greatly
disturbed by this scandal, that the greater part of those who boasted of the title of the Church rejected
the pure doctrine of Christ. For this reason Paul shows that, though all indiscriminately boast of
the name of God, there are many of that multitude who are reprobates; as he elsewhere ( Romans
9:7) affirms, that not all who are descended from Abraham according to the flesh, are the lawful
children of Abraham.
And the knowledge of that truth  I consider the copulative and to be here equivalent to that is ;
so that the passage might run thus: “according to the faith of the elect of God, that is, the knowledge
of that truth which is according to godliness.” This clause explains what is the nature of that “faith”
which he has mentioned, though it is not a full definition of it, but a description framed so as to
apply to the present context. For the purpose of maintaining that his apostleship is free from all
imposture and error, he solemnly declares that it contains nothing but known and ascertained truth,
by which men are instructed in the pure worship of God. But as every word has its own weight, it
is highly proper to enter into a detailed explanation.
First, when “faith” is called “knowledge,” it is distinguished not only from opinion, but from
that shapeless faith which the Papists have contrived; for they have forged an implicit faith destitute
of all light of the understanding. But when Paul describes it to be a quality which essentially belongs
to faith — to know the truth, he plainly shews that there is no faith without knowledge.
The word truth  expresses still more clearly the certainty which is demanded by the nature of
faith; for faith is not satisfied with probable arguments, but holds what is true. Besides, he does not
speak of every kind of truth, but of the heavenly doctrine, which is contrasted with the vanity of
the human understanding. As God has revealed himself to us by means of that truth, so it is alone
209 “If faith be the fruit of election, the prescience of faith does not influence the electing act of God. It is called ‘the faith of
God’s elect,’ Paul an apostle of Jesus Christ, according to the faith of God’s elect, ( Titus 1:1 ,) that is, settled in this office to
bring the elect of God to faith. If men be chosen by God upon the foresight of faith, or not chosen till they have faith, they are
not so much God’s elect as God is their elect: they choose God by faith, before God chooseth them by love. It had not been the
faith of God’s elect, that is, of those already chosen, but the faith of those that were to be chosen by God afterwards. Election is
the cause of faith, and not faith the cause of election. Fire is the cause of heat, and not heat of fire; the sun is the cause of day,
and not the day the cause of the rising of the sun. Men are not chosen because they believe, but they believe because they are
chosen. The Apostle did ill else to appropriate that to the elect, which they had no more interest in by virtue of their election
than the veriest reprobate in the world. If the foresight of what works might be done by his creatures was the motive of his
choosing them why did he not choose the devils to redemption, who could have done him better service, by the strength of their
nature, than the whole mass of Adam’s posterity? Well, then, there is no possible way to lay the original foundation of this act
of election and preterition in anything but the absolute sovereignty of God.” — Charnock .
worthy of the honor of being called “the truth” — a name which is bestowed on it in many parts
of Scripture.
“And the Spirit will lead you into all truth.” ( John 16:13 .)
“Thy word is the truth.” ( John 17:17 .)
“Who hath bewitched you that ye should not obey the truth?”
(Galatians 3:l .)
“Having heard the word of the truth, the gospel of the Son of God.” ( Colossians 1:5 .)
“He wisheth all to come to the knowledge of the truth.”
(1 Timothy 2:4 .)
“The Church is the pillar and foundation of the truth.”
(1 Timothy 3 15 .)
In a word, that truth is the right and sincere knowledge of God, which frees us from all error
and falsehood. So much the more ought it to be valued by us, since nothing is more wretched than
to wander like cattle during our whole life.
Which is according to godliness . This clause especially limits “the truth” of which he had
spoken, but at the same time commends the doctrine of Paul from the fruit and end of it, because
it has no other object than that God should be worshipped in a right manner, and that pure religion
should flourish among men. In this manner he defends his doctrine from every suspicion of vain
curiosity, as he did before Felix, ( Acts 24:10 ,) and afterwards before Agrippa, ( Acts 26:1 ;) for,
since all questions which do not tend to edification ought justly to be suspected and even hated by
good men, the only lawful commendation of doctrine is this, that it instructs us to fear God and to
bow before him with reverence. And hence we are also informed, that the greater progress any one
has made in godliness, he is so much the better disciple of Christ; and that he ought to be reckoned
a true theologian who edifies consciences in the fear of God.
2.In the hope  (or, on account of the hope ) of eternal life  This undoubtedly denotes the cause;
for that is the force of the Greek preposition     ; and therefore it may be translated, “On account of
the hope,” or “On the hope.” True religion and the practice of godliness — begin with meditation
on the heavenly life; and in like manner, when Paul ( Colossians 1:5 ) praises the faith and love of
the Colossians, he makes the cause and foundation of them to be “the hope laid up in heaven.” The
Sadducees and all who confine our hope to this world, whatever they may pretend, can do nothing
else than produce contempt of God, while they reduce men to the condition of cattle. Accordingly,
it ought always to be the aim of a good teacher, to turn away the eyes of men from the world, that
they may look up to heaven. I readily acknowledge that we ought to value the glory of God more
highly than our salvation; but we are not now discussing the question which of these two ought to
be first in order. All that I say is — that men never seek God in a right manner till they have
confidence to approach to him; and, therefore, that we never apply our mind to godliness till we
have been instructed about the hope of the heavenly life. 210
210 “Thus he shews that it will never be possible for men to dedicate themselves entirely to the service of God, if they do not
think more about God than about all things else. In short, there is no living root, no faith no religion, till we have been led to
heaven, that is, till we know that God has not created us to keep us here in an earthly life with brute beasts, but that he has adopted
us to be his heritage, and reckons us to be his children. If, therefore, we do not look up to heaven, it is impossible that we shall
have true devotion to surrender ourselves to God, or that there shall be any faith or Christianity in us. And that is the reason why
— among all who, in the present day, are accounted Christians, and give themselves out to be such — there are very few who
have this true mark, which Paul has here given to all the children of God. It is because all are occupied with the present life, and
Which God promised before the times of ages.  As Augustine translated the words,
to mean — not “the times of ages” but “eternal times,” he gives himself great uneasiness about
“the eternity of times,” till at length he explains “eternal times” as denoting those which go beyond
all antiquity. As to the meaning, he and Jerome and other commentators agree, that God determined,
before the creation of the world, to give that salvation which he hath now manifested by the gospel.
Thus Paul would have used the word promise incorrectly instead of decree; for before men existed
there was no one to whom he could promise.
For this reason, while I do not reject this exposition, yet when I take a close survey of the whole
matter, I am constrained to adopt a different interpretation — that eternal life was promised to men
many ages ago, and not only to those who lived at that time, but also for our own age. It was not
for the benefit of Abraham alone, but with a view to all who should live after him, that God said,
“In thy seed shall all nations be blessed.” ( Genesis 22:18 .)
Nor is this inconsistent with what he says, in another sense, ( 2 Timothy 1:9 ) that salvation was
given to men “before the times of ages.” The meaning of the word is still the same in both passages;
for, since the Greek word      , denotes an uninterrupted succession of time from the beginning to
the end of the world, Paul declares, in that passage, that salvation was given or decreed for the elect
of God before times began to flow. But because in this passage he treats of the promise, he does
not include all ages, so as to lead us back beyond the creation of the world, but shews that many
ages 211 have elapsed since salvation was promised.
If any person prefer to view “the times of ages” as a concise expression for the ages themselves,
he is at liberty to do so. But because salvation was given by the eternal election of God before it
was promised, the act of giving salvation is put in that passage ( 2 Timothy 1:9 ) before all ages, and
therefore we must supply the word all. But here it means nothing more than that the promise is
more ancient than a long course of ages, because it began immediately after the creation of the
world. In the same sense he shews that the gospel, which was to have been proclaimed when Christ
rose from the dead, had been promised in the Scriptures by the prophets; for there is a wide difference
between the promise which was formerly given to the fathers and the present exhibition of grace.
Who cannot lie.  This expression         is added for glorifying God, and still more for confirming
our faith. And, indeed, whenever the subject treated of is our salvation, we ought to recollect that
it is founded on the word of Him who can neither deceive nor lie. Moreover, the only proof of the
whole of religion is — the unchangeable truth of God. 212
are so firmly bound to it, that they cannot rise higher. Now perceiving this vice to be so common, so much the more ought we
to guard against it, and break the force of that which we cannot altogether destroy, till we come into close fellowship with God,
which will only be, when the hope of eternal life shall be actually and sincerely formed in our hearts.”— Fr. Ser.
211 “Beaucoup de centeines d’ans .” — “Many centuries of years.”
212 “What a strange sort of men are these, that will endure to be so exposed, so scorned, so trampled upon, as they that bear
the Christian name commonly are? What is the reason of it? What account will a reasonable man give, why he will so expose
himself? I will tell you the reason. ‘Therefore we labor and suffer reproach, because we hope in God, in the living God, and we
are pretty well persuaded we shall not finally be losers. We shall not have an ill bargain of it at last.’ As the same Apostle, when
he writes himself ‘an Apostle and servant of Jesus Christ’ seems to allow that he was to doom himself to all the sufferings and
calamities that the enemies of the Christian cause could load him with and lay upon him, for his assuming to himself such names
of ‘an Apostle and servant of Jesus Christ.’ But why should Paul, — that wise and prudent man, that learned man, that man of
so considerable reputation among his own countrymen — why should he come to be written among the Apostles and servants
of Jesus Christ? Why, saith he, it is in hope of eternal life, which God, that cannot lie, hath promised. ( Titus 1:1, 2 .) I avow
myself an Apostle and servant of Jesus Christ upon this inducement, and for this reason; and so I mean to continue unto the end.
It is the hope of eternal life which God, that cannot lie, hath promised to me. He whose nature doth not allow him to deceive to
3.But hath manifested  There was indeed some manifestation of this kind, when God in ancient
times spake by his prophets; but because Christ publicly, displayed by his coming those thing which
they had obscurely predicted, and the Gentiles were afterwards admitted into the fellowship of the
covenant, in this sense Paul says that what had formerly been exhibited in part “hath now been
manifested.”
In his own times  This has the same meaning as “the fullness of times.” ( Galatians 4:4 .) He
reminds us that the time when it pleased the Lord to do this — must have been the most seasonable
time for doing it; and he mentions this for the purpose of meeting the rashness of men, who have
always the hardihood to inquire why it was not sooner, or why it is to-day rather than to-morrow.
In order therefore that our curiosity may not exceed proper bounds, he shews that the “times” are
placed in the hand, and at the disposal, of God, in such a manner that we ought to think that he does
everything in the proper order and at the most seasonable time.
His word.  Or, by his word; for it is not uncommon with Greek writers to supply the preposition
by. Or, he calls Christ the Word; if it be not thought preferable to supply something for the sake of
completing the sentence. Were it not that the second exposition is a little forced, in other respects
I should give it the preference. Thus John says,
“What we have heard, what we have seen with our eyes, what our hands have handled of the
Word of life; and the life was manifested.” ( 1 John 1:1, 2 .)
I therefore prefer what is a simple meaning, that God hath manifested the word concerning the
life by the preaching of the gospel.
The preaching, of which he speaks, is the gospel proclaimed, as the chief thing which we hear
in it is — that Christ is given to us, and that in him there is life.
Which hath been committed to me.  Because all are not indiscriminately fit for so important an
office, and no man ought to thrust himself into it, he asserts his calling, according to his custom.
Here we ought to learn — what we have often remarked on other occasions — that the honor is
not due to any man, till he has proved that God has ordained him, for even the ministers of Satan
proudly boast that God has called them, but there is no truth in their words. Now Paul states nothing
but what is known and proved, when he mentions his calling.
Besides, from this passage we learn for what purpose they were made apostles. It was for the
sake of publishing the gospel, as he says elsewhere,
“Woe to me if I preach not the gospel, for a dispensation is committed unto me.” ( 1 Corinthians
9:16, 17 .)
Accordingly, they who enact dumb show, in the midst of idleness and luxury, are excessively
impudent in boasting that they are the successors of the apostles.
Of God our Savior  He applies the same epithet to the Father and to Christ, so that each of them
is our Savior, but for a different reason; for the Father is called our Savior, because he redeemed
us by the death of his Son, that he might make us heirs of eternal life; and the Son, because he shed
his blood as the pledge and the price of our salvation. Thus the Son hath brought salvation to us
from the Father, and the Father hath bestowed it through the Son.
4To Titus, my own son, according to the common faith.  Hence it is evident in what sense a
minister of the word is said to beget spiritually those whom he brings to the obedience of Christ,
whom it is impossible to lie, I firmly and securely hope in him; and, therefore, I will readily dispose myself to encounter all the
difficulties and hardships which the service of Jesus Christ can lay me open to.” — Howe.
that is, so that he himself is also begotten. Paul declares himself to be the father of Titus, with
respect to his faith; but immediately adds, that this faith is common to both, so that both of them
alike have the same Father in heaven. Accordingly, God does not diminish his own prerogative,
when he pronounces those to be spiritual fathers along with himself, by whose ministry he regenerates
whom he chooses; for of themselves they do nothing, but only by the efficacy of the Spirit. As to
the remainder of the verse, the exposition of it will be found in the Commentaries on the former
Epistles, and especially on the First Epistle to Timothy. 213
Titus 1:5-6
5. Huius rei gratia reliqui to Cretae ut ea quae
desunt corrigas et constituas per civitates
presbyteros sicut ego tibi disposui5. For this cause left I thee in Crete, that thou
shouldest set in order the things that are wanting,
and ordain elders in every city, as I had appointed
thee:
6. Si quis sine crimine est unius uxoris vir
filios habens fideles non in accusatione luxuriae
aut non subditos6. If any be blameless, the husband of one
wife, having faithful children not accused of riot
or unruly.
5.For this reason I left thee in Crete  This preface clearly proves, that Titus is not so much
admonished on his own account as recommended to others, that no one may hinder him. Paul
testifies that he has appointed him in his own room; and on that account all should acknowledge
and receive him with reverence as the Apostle’s deputy. The apostles had no fixed place assigned
to them, but were charged to spread the gospel through the whole world; and for this reason, when
they left one city or district to go to another, they were wont to place fit men as their substitutes,
to complete the work which they had begun. Thus Paul affirms that he founded the church of the
Corinthians, but that there were other workmen, 214 who must build on his foundation, that is, carry
forward the building.
This, indeed, belongs to all pastors; for the churches will always stand in need of increase and
progress, as long as the world shall endure. But in addition to the ordinary office of pastors, the
care of organizing the church was committed to Titus. Till the churches have been already organized,
and reduced to some order, pastors were not usually appointed over them. But Titus held some
additional charge, which consisted in giving a form to churches that had not yet been properly
arranged, and in appointing a fixed kind of government accompanied by discipline. Having laid
the foundation, Paul departed; and then it became the duty of Titus to carry the work higher, that
the building might have fair proportions.
This is what he calls correcting those things which are still wanting. The building of the Church
is not a work so easy that it can be brought all at once to perfection. How long Paul was in Crete
— is uncertain; but he had spent some time there, and had faithfully devoted his labors to erect the
kingdom of Christ. He did not lack the most consummate skill that can be found in man; he was
unwearied in toil; and yet he acknowledged that he left the work rough and incomplete. Hence we
213 See p. 21 .
214 “Mais que les autres estoyent macons ou charpentiers .” — “But that the others were masons and carpenters.”
see the difficulty; and, indeed, we find, by experience, in the present day, that it is not the labor of
one or two years to restore fallen. churches to a tolerable condition. Accordingly, those who have
made diligent progress for many years — must still be attentive to correct many things. 215
Here it is highly proper to observe the modesty of Paul who willingly permits another person
to complete the work which he had begun. And, indeed, although Titus is greatly inferior to him,
he does not refuse to have him for             a “corrector,” to give the finishing hand to his work.
Such ought to be the dispositions of godly teachers; not that every one should labor to make
everything bend to his own ambitious views, but that they should strive to assist each other, and
that, when any one has labored more successfully, he should be congratulated and not envied by
all the rest.
And yet we must not imagine that Paul intended that Titus should correct those things which
he had left undone, either through ignorance, or forgetfulness, or carelessness, but those things
which he could not finish on account of the shortness of the time. In short, he enjoined Titus to
make that correction which he would himself have made, if he had remained longer in Crete; not
by varying — not by changing anything, but by adding what was wanting; because the difficulty
of such a work does not allow every part of it to be done in a single day.
And appoint presbyters in each city216 In the spiritual building this nearly comes next to doctrine,
that pastors be ordained, to take charge of governing the Church; and therefore Paul mentions it
here in preference to everything else. It is a point which ought to be carefully observed, that churches
cannot safely remain without the ministry of pastors, and that consequently, wherever there is a
considerable body of people, a pastor should be appointed over it. And yet he does not say that
each town shall have a pastor, so that no place shall have more than one; but he means that no towns
shall be destitute of pastors
Presbyters  or elders. It is well known, that it was not on account of age, that they received this
appellation; for sometimes those who were still young — such as Timothy — were admitted to this
rank. But in all languages it has been customary to apply this honorable designation to all rulers.
Although we may conclude, from 1 Timothy 5:17 , that there were two classes of presbyters, the
context will immediately show, that here none other than teachers are meant, that is, those who
were ordained to teach; for immediately afterwards, he will call the same persons “bishops.”
But it may be thought that he gives too much power to Titus, when he bids him appoint ministers
for all the churches. That would be almost royal power. Besides, this method takes away from each
215 “Those who are guided by ambition would wish to be thought clever people on the first day; they would wish to enjoy such
reputation as to have it thought that they discharged their duty so faithfully that nothing more could be desired. On the contrary,
when we have labored during our whole life to edify the Church of God, still we shall not succeed to the full extent. Let us
therefore know that we must not presume so far on our industry or our virtues, that he who is endued with more abundant graces
can suddenly have edified the Church of God to perfection; but we must assist each other. He who is farthest advanced must
know that he cannot do everything, and must bend his shoulders and ask assistance from those whom God has appointed, and
must be well pleased that others make progress, provided that all aim at serving God and advancing the kingdom of our Lord
Jesus Christ. If we look well to ourselves, there will always be reason to grieve, because we are very far from having performed
our duty. And those who make themselves believe this or that, and say, ‘Here is a church so well reformed that nothing more is
needed’ — are mistaken; for if they knew what reformation is, they would beware of thinking that there was no room for finding
fault. Whatever pains we take in arranging matters, and bringing them into order, there are indeed many things which, when
once begun, will follow in a regular train; but as to reaching perfection, we are very far from it.”— Fr. Ser.
216 “          , Not ‘in every city,’ but ‘in each city or town,’ (literally, ‘city by city,’) of all those which had Christian congregations.
Of such there might be several in this ‘hundred-citied isle;’ though the name       was often given to towns; and there is reason
to think that not a few of the Cretan cities were no better.” — Bloomfield
church the right of choosing, and from the College of Pastors the power of judging; and thus the
sacred administration of the Church would be almost wholly profaned. The answer is easy. He does
not give permission to Titus, that he alone may do everything in this matter, and may place over
the churches those whom he thinks fit to appoint to be bishops; but only bids him preside, as
moderator, at the elections, which is quite necessary. This mode of expression is very common. In
the same manner, a consul, or regent, or dictator is said to have created consuls, on account of
having presided over the public assembly in electing them. Thus also Luke relates that Paul and
Barnabas ordained elders in every church. ( Acts 14:23 .) Not that they alone, in an authoritative
manner, appointed pastors which the churches had neither approved nor known; but that they
ordained fit men, who had been chosen or desired by the people. From this passage we do indeed
learn, that there was not at that time such equality among the ministers of Christ but that some one
had authority and deliberative voice above others; but this has nothing to do with the tyrannical
and profane custom which prevails in Popery as to Collations. The apostles had a widely different
mode of procedure.
6.If any one is blameless  In order that no one may be angry with Titus, as if he were too rigorous
or severe in rejecting any, Paul takes the whole blame to himself; 217 for he declares that he has
expressly commanded, that no one may be admitted, unless he be such a person as is here described.
Accordingly, as he testified, a little before, that he had invested Titus with authority to preside in
the appointment of pastors, that others might allow to him that right; so he now relates the injunction
which he had given, lest the severity of Titus should be exposed to the illwill of the ignorant, or
the slanders of wicked men.
As this passage presents to us a lively portrait of a lawful bishop, we ought to observe it carefully;
but, on the other hand, as almost everything that is here contained has been explained by me in the
Commentary on the First Epistle to Timothy, it will be enough at present to touch on it slightly.
When he says, that a bishop must be           , blameless, he does not mean one who is exempt from
every vice, (for no such person could at any time be found,) but one who is marked by no disgrace
that would lessen his authority. He means, therefore, that he shall be a man of unblemished
reputation. 218
The husband of one wife  The reason why this rule is laid down — has been explained by us in
the Commentary on the First Epistle to Timothy. 219 Polygamy was so common among the Jews,
that the wicked custom had nearly passed into a law. If any man had married two wives before he
made a profession of Christianity, it would have been cruel to compel him to divorce one of them;
217 “Prend sur soy toute l’envie, voulant qu’on luy impute tout ce que The fera en cest endroit .” — “Takes all the blame on
himself, wishing that to him may be imputed all that Titus shall do in this matter.”
218 “It is true, that the servants of God will never be without blame; as he even says, that they cannot avoid walking amidst
disgrace and reproach. It is true, that Paul lived so virtuously that no fault could be found with him, and that too, before he came
to the faith of Jesus Christ; so that he lived without reproach, and was a mirror and a jewel of holiness. Indeed he know not what
he did, for hitherto he had not been directed by the Spirit of God; but he led a life so good that it was not liable to any reproach.
And yet he tells us that he was pointed at with the finger, was mocked at, was reproached, was even accursed among believers,
whose ingratitude was such that in his absence he was reviled and loaded with many slanders. So it is with the servants of God.
But when Paul demands that they shall be without crime, he means that we should inquire and ascertain if the life of a man be
pure and without blame, and if he continues to conduct himself in that manner. Although we cannot shut the mouths of all
slanderers, that they shall not revile us, yet we must be without crime; for it is said, that we shall be reviled as evil-doers, but
we shall be pure and innocent. And in what way? Before God we shall have this testimony, that he approves of us, and that all
the talk against us is a lie.”— Fr. Ser.
219 See p. 76 .
and therefore the apostles endured what was in itself faulty, because they could not correct it.
Besides, they who had involved themselves by marrying more than one wife at a time, even though
they had been prepared to testify their repentance by retaining but one wife, had, nevertheless,
given a sign of their incontinence, which might have been a brand on their good name. The meaning
is the same as if Paul had enjoined them to elect those who had lived chastely in marriage — had
been satisfied with having a single wife, and had forbidden those who had manifested the power
of lust by marrying many wives. At the same time, he who, having become an unmarried man by
the death of his wife, marries another, ought, nevertheless, to be accounted “the husband of one
wife;” for the apostle does not say, that they shall choose him who has been, but him who is, “the
husband of one wife.”
Having believing children  Seeing that it is required that a pastor shall have prudence and gravity,
it is proper that those qualities should be exhibited in his family; for how shall that man who cannot
rule his own house — be able to govern the church! Besides, not only must the bishop himself be
free from reproach, but his whole family ought to be a sort of mirror of chaste and honorable
discipline; and, therefore, in the First Epistle to Timothy, he not less strictly enjoins their wives
what they ought to be. 220
First, he demands that the children shall be “believers;” whence it is obvious that they have
been educated in the sound doctrine of godliness, and in the fear of the Lord. Secondly, that they
shall not be devoted to luxury, that they may be known to have been educated to temperance and
frugality. Thirdly, that they shall not be disobedient; for he who cannot obtain from his children
any reverence or subjection — will hardly be able to restrain the people by the bridle of discipline.
Titus 1:7-9
7. oportet enim episcopum sine crimine esse
sicut Dei dispensatorem non superbum non7. For a bishop must be blameless, as the
steward of God; not selfwilled, not soon angry,
iracundum non vinolentum non percussorem non
turpilucri cupidumnot given to wine, no striker, not given to filthy
lucre;
8. sed hospitalem benignum sobrium iustum
sanctum continentem8. But a lover of hospitality, a lover of good
men, sober, just, holy, temperate;
9. amplectentem eum qui secundum
doctrinam est fidelem sermonem ut potens sit et9. Holding fast the faithful word as he hath
been taught, that he may be able by sound
exhortari in doctrina sana et eos qui contradicunt
argueredoctrine both to exhort and to convince the
gainsayers.
7.For a bishop ought to be blameless, as a governor of the house of God  He again repeats, that
they who aspire to the office of a bishop ought to retain an unspotted reputation; and he confirms
it by this argument, that, because the Church is the house of God, every person who is appointed
to govern it — is constituted, as it were, governor of the house of God. Now, he would be ill spoken
of among men, who should take a scandalous and infamous person, and make him his steward; and
220 See p. 87 .
therefore it would be far more base and intolerable to appoint such persons to be rulers of the
household of God. The Latin word dispensator  (steward or manager) — employed in the old
translation, and retained by Erasmus — does not at all express Paul’s meaning; for, in order that
greater care may be exercised in the election, he adorns the office of a bishop within this honorable
eulogy, that it is a government of the house of God, as he says to Timothy,
“That thou mayest know how thou oughtest to conduct thyself in the house of the living God,
the pillar and foundation of truth.”
(1 Timothy 3:15 .)
This passage plainly shows that there is no distinction between a presbyter and a bishop; for
he now calls indiscriminately, by the latter name, those whom he formerly he employs both names
in the same sense, without any distinction; as Jerome has remarked, both in his Commentary on
this passage, and in his Epistle to Evagrius. And hence we may perceive how much greater deference
has been paid to the opinions of men than ought to have been paid to them; for the language of the
Holy Spirit, has been set aside, and the custom introduced by the arbitrary will of man has prevailed.
For my own part, I do not find fault with the custom which has existed from the very beginning of
the Church, that each assembly of bishops shall have one moderator; 221 but that the name of office
which God has given to all, shall be conveyed to one alone, and that all the rest shall be deprived
of it, is both unreasonable and absurd. Besides, to pervert the language of the Holy Spirit — in such
a manner that the same words shall have a different meaning from what he intended — is excessive
and profane hardihood. 222
Not self-willed  With good reason does he condemn this vice in a bishop, whose duty it is not
only to receive kindly those who come to him of their own accord, but also to allure those who
withdraw themselves, that he may conduct all in like manner to Christ. Now,          (as Plato says
in one of his Epistles to Dion)        μ                  that is, “self-will is closely allied to solitude;” for
society and friendship cannot be cherished, when every man pleases himself to such an extent as
to refuse to yield and accommodate himself to others. And, indeed, every (       ) “self-willed”
person, as soon as an occasion presents itself, will instantly become a fanatic.
8.But hospitable, devoted to kindness  Hence it is evident how destructive is that plague which
tears the Church by quarrels. With this vice he contrasts, first, docility, and next, gentleness and
modesty towards all; for a bishop will never teach well, who is not also ready to learn. Augustine
praises highly a saying of Cyprian: “Let him be as patient to learn as skillful to teach.” Besides,
bishops often need advice and warnings. If they refuse to be admonished, if they reject good advices,
they will immediately fall headlong to the grievous injury of the Church. The remedy against these
evils, therefore, is, that they be not wise to themselves.
I have chosen to translate            devoted to kindness, rather than with Erasmus, “a lover of good
things;” for this virtue, accompanied by hospitality, appears to be contrasted by Paul with
covetousness and niggardliness. He calls that man just, who lives among men without doing harm
221 “Un gouverneur ou superintendaet .” — “A governor or superintendent.”
222 “Those whom he formerly called presbyters he now calls bishops, (which means overseers or superintendents,) and he gives
this name to all whose duty it is to preach the word of God. And so it was a corruption and abuse in Popery — that is, in the
ancient Church — that one individual was called bishop; for that was to change the language of the Holy Spirit, and we ought
to speak in accordance with the Scripture. Now we see that Satan labors incessantly to draw us aside from the simplicity of the
word of God.” — Fr. Ser.
to any one. Holiness  has reference to God; for even Plato draws this distinction between the two
words.
9.Holding fast the faithful word  This is the chief gift in a bishop, who is elected principally for
the sake of teaching; for the Church cannot be governed in any other way than by the word. “The
faithful word” is the appellation which he gives to that doctrine which is pure, and which has
proceeded from the mouth of God. He wishes that a bishop should hold it fast, so as not only to be
well instructed in it, but to be constant in maintaining it. There are some fickle persons who easily
suffer themselves to be carried away to various kinds of doctrine; while others are cast down by
fear, or moved by any occurrence to forsake the defense of the truth. Paul therefore enjoins that
those persons shall be chosen who, having cordially embraced the truth of God, and holding it
firmly, never allow it to be wrested from them, or can be torn from it. And, indeed, nothing is more
dangerous than that fickleness of which I have spoken, when a pastor does not stedfastly adhere to
that doctrine of which he ought to be the unshaken defender. In short, in a pastor there is demanded
not only learning, but such zeal for pure doctrine as never to depart from it.
But what is meant by according to instruction  or doctrine?223 The meaning is, that it is useful
for the edification of the Church; for Paul is not wont to give the name of “doctrine” to anything
that is learned and known without promoting any advancement of godliness; but, on the contrary,
he condemns as vain and unprofitable all the speculations which yield no advantage, however
ingenious they may be in other respects. Thus, “He that teacheth, let him do it in doctrine;” that is,
let him labor to do good to the hearers. ( Romans 12:7 .) In short, the first thing required in a pastor
is, that he be well instructed in the knowledge of sound doctrine; the second is, that, with unwavering
firmness of courage, he hold by the confession of it to the last; and the third is, that he make his
manner of teaching tend to edification, and do not, through motives of ambition, fly about through
the subtleties of frivolous curiosity, but seek only the solid advantage of the Church.
That he may be able  The pastor ought to have two voices: one, for gathering the sheep; and
another, for warding off and driving away wolves and thieves. The Scripture supplies him with the
means of doing both; for he who is deeply skilled in it will be able both to govern those who are
teachable, and to refute the enemies of the truth. This twofold use of Scripture Paul describes when
he says, That he may be able to exhort and to convince adversaries  And hence let us learn, first,
what is the true knowledge of a bishop, and, next, to what purpose it ought to be applied. That
bishop is truly wise, who holds the right faith; and he makes a proper use of his knowledge, when
he applies it to the edification of the people.
This is remarkable applause bestowed on the word of God, when it is pronounced to be sufficient,
not only for governing the teachable, but for subduing the obstinacy of enemies. And, indeed, the
power of truth revealed by the Lord is such that it easily vanquishes all falsehoods. Let the Popish
bishops now go and boast of being the successors of the apostles, seeing that the greater part of
them are so ignorant of all doctrine, as to reckon ignorance to be no small part of their dignity.
Titus 1:10-12
223 “Selon instruction ou doctrine .”
10. sunt enim multi et inoboedientes
vaniloqui et seductores maxime qui de
circumcisione sunt10. For there are many unruly and vain talkers
and deceivers, specially they of the circumcision:
11. quos oportet redargui qui universas domos
subvertunt docentes quae non oportet turpis lucri
gratia11. Whose mouths must be stopped, who
subvert whole houses, teaching things which they
ought not, for filthy lucre’s sake.
12. dixit quidam ex illis proprius ipsorum
propheta Cretenses semper mendaces malae
bestiae ventres pigri12. One of themselves, even a prophet of their
own, said, The Cretians are alway liars, evil
beasts, slow bellies.
10For there are many unruly.224 After having laid down a general rule, which ought to be
everywhere observed, in order that Titus may be more attentive to adhere to it, he holds out to him
the urgent necessity which ought to excite him more than all things else. He warns him that he has
to deal with many obstinate and incorrigible persons, that many are puffed up with vanity and idle
talk, that many are deceivers; and that therefore they ought to choose, on the other hand, such
leaders as are qualified and well prepared to oppose them. For, if the children of this world, when
dangers arise, increase their solicitude and watchfulness, it would be disgraceful for us, when Satan
is using his utmost efforts to remain careless and inactive, as if we were in a state of peace.
Unruly  Instead of ( inobedientes ) disobedient, which is the rendering in the old translation for
            Erasmus translates it ( intractabiles ) incorrigible. He means those who cannot endure to be
brought to obey, and who throw off the yoke of subjection. He gives the appellation of vain talkers ,
225 not only to the authors of false doctrines, but to those who, addicted to ambitious display, occupy
themselves with nothing but useless subtleties.             226 (vain talking) is contrasted with useful
and solid doctrine, and therefore includes all trivial and frivolous speculations, which contain
nothing but empty bombast, because they contribute nothing to piety and the fear of God. And such
is all the scholastic theology that is found, in the present day, in Popery. Yet he calls the same
persons deceivers of minds . It may be thought preferable to view this as relating to a different class
of persons; but, for my own part, I think that it means the same class; for the teachers of such trifles
entice and fascinate the minds of men, so as no longer to receive sound doctrine.
Chiefly they who are of the circumcision.  He says that they are chiefly of the Jews; for it is
highly requisite that such plagues shall be known by all. We ought not to listen to those who plead
that we should spare the reputation of this or that individual, when the matter in question is the
great danger of the whole Church. And so much the greater danger was to be apprehended from
that nation, because it claimed superiority above others on account of the sacredness of its lineage.
This is therefore the reason why Paul reproves the Jews more sharply, in order to take from them
the power of doing injury.
11Whose mouth must be stopped  A good pastor ought therefore to be on the watch, so as not
to give silent permission to wicked and dangerous doctrines to make gradual progress, or to allow
wicked men an opportunity of spreading them. But it may be asked, “How is it possible for a bishop
to constrain obstinate and self-willed men to be silent? For such persons, even though they are
224 “Car il y en a plusieurs qui ne se peuvent ranger .” — “For there are many of them who cannot submit.”
225 “Parlans vanitez .” — “Speaking vanities.”
226 “Vanite de paroles .” — “Vanity of words.”
vanquished in argument, still do not hold their peace; and it frequently happens that, the more
manifestly they are refuted and vanquished, they become the more insolent; for not only is their
malice strengthened and inflamed, but they give themselves up to indolence.” I reply, when they
have been smitten down by the sword of God’s word, and overwhelmed by the force of the truth,
the Church may command them to be silent; and if they persevere, they may at least be banished
from the society of believers, so that they shall have no opportunity of doing harm. 227 Yet by
“shutting the mouth” Paul simply means — “to refute their vain talking,” even though they should
not cease to make a noise; for he who is convicted by the word of God, however he may chatter,
has nothing to say.
Who overturn whole houses.  If the faith of one individual were in danger of being overturned,
(for we are speaking of the perdition of a single soul redeemed by the blood of Christ) the pastor
should immediately gird himself for the combat; how much less tolerable is it to see whole houses
overturned?
Teaching things which they ought not.  The manner in which they were overturned is described
in these words. Hence we may infer how dangerous it is to make even the smallest departure from
sound doctrine; for he does not say that the doctrines, by which they overturned the faith of many,
were openly wicked; but we may understand by this designation every kind of corruptions, when
there is a turning aside from the desire of edification. Thus it is in reality, that, amidst so great
weakness of the flesh, we are exceedingly prone to fall; and hence it arises, that Satan easily and
speedily destroys, by his ministers, what godly teachers had reared with great and long-continued
toil.
He next points out the source of the evil, a desire of dishonest gain; by which he reminds us
how destructive a plague avarice is in teachers; for, as soon as they give themselves up to the pursuit
of gain, they must labor to obtain the favor and countenance of men. This is quickly followed by
the corruption of pure doctrine.
12One of themselves, a prophet of their own  I have no doubt that he who is here spoken of is
Epimenides, who was a native of Crete; for, when the Apostle says that this author was “one of
themselves,” and was “a prophet of their own,” he undoubtedly means that he belonged to the
nation of the Cretans. Why he calls him a Prophet--is doubtful. Some think that the reason is, that
the book from which Paul borrowed this passage bears the title          μ   “concerning oracles.”
Others are of opinion that Paul speaks ironically, by saying that they have such a Prophet — a
Prophet worthy of a nation which refuses to listen to the servants of God. But as poets are sometimes
called by the Greeks (        ) “prophets,” and as the Latin authors call them Vates , I consider it to
227 “If we mark such persons, and point them out with the finger, everybody will avoid them, and thus they will be prevented
from doing harm This its what Paul had in his eye. Following his example, when we see people who can do nothing but contrive
measures for disturbing and ruining the Church, and who are altogether addicted to evil, it is true that, if we can bring them back
in a gentle manner to the right path, we should endeavor to do so. But if they persist, and if we perceive that they are obstinate
in their malice, we must not be wiser than the Holy Spirit. They must be known, they must be exposed, and their baseness must
be held up to public view, that they may be abhorred, and that others may withdraw from them, as we have formerly seen in
other passages. As for those who murmur when we make use of such liberty, they shew plainly that they aim at nothing but
confusion in the Church. They do indeed make a show of having some regard to humanity. ‘And must we degrade people, and
hold them up to scorn, as if we wished to put them to shame?’ We answer, Must we leave the poor Church of God in the power
of wolves and robbers? Must all the flock be scattered, the blood of our Lord Jesus Christ trampled under foot, and souls which
he has redeemed at so costly a price go to perdition, and all order be set aside; and must we nevertheless be silent and shut our
eyes?”— Fr. Ser.
denote simply a teacher. The reason why they were so called appears to have been, that they were
always reckoned to be (                              )  “a divine race and moved by divine inspiration.” Thus
also Adimantus, in the Second Book of Plato’s treatise                after having called the poets
     “sons of the gods,” adds, that they also became their prophets. For this reason I think that Paul
accommodates his style to the ordinary practice. Nor is it of any importance to inquire on what
occasion Epimenides calls his countrymen liars, namely, because they boast of having the sepulcher
of Jupiter; but seeing that the poet takes it from an ancient and well-known report, the Apostle
quotes it as a proverbial saying. 228
From this passage we may infer that those persons are superstitious, who do not venture to
borrow anything from heathen authors. All truth is from God; and consequently, if wicked men
have said anything that is true and just, we ought not to reject it; for it has come from God. Besides,
all things are of God; and, therefore, why should it not be lawful to dedicate to his glory everything
that can properly be employed for such a purpose? But on this subject the reader may consult Basil’s
discourse 229                ,                 . .
Titus 1:13-16
13. testimonium hoc verum est quam ob
causam increpa illos dure ut sani sint in fide13. This witness is true. Wherefore rebuke
them sharply, that they may be sound in the faith;
14. non intendentes iudaicis fabulis et
mandatis hominum aversantium se a veritate14. Not giving heed to Jewish fables, and
commandments of men, that turn from the truth.
15. omnia munda mundis coinquinatis autem
et infidelibus nihil mundum sed inquinatae sunt
eorum et mens et conscientia15. Unto the pure all things are pure: but unto
them that are defiled and unbelieving is nothing
pure; but even their mind and conscience is
defiled.
16. confitentur se nosse Deum factis autem
negant cum sunt abominati et incredibiles et ad
omne opus bonum reprobi16. They profess that they know God; but in
works they deny him, being abominable, and
disobedient, and unto every good work reprobate.
228 The Greek hexameter verse which Paul quotes has been rendered into Latin hexameter by Calvin himself, and into a French
couplet by his translator; and it may be worth while to set down the quotation in the three languages:
Greek. —                   ,           ,
Latin. — Mendax, venter iners, semper male bestia Cres est .
French. — “ I’ousjours menteuse, et tousiours male-beste ,
Venice sacs coeur, et fay-neant est Crete .” — Ed.
229 “Qu’il lise l’oraison que Basile en a faite, remonstrant aux jeunes gens comment ils se doyvent aider des livres des autheurs
profanes .” — “Let him read Basil’s discourse on this subject, instructing young persons how they ought to avail themselves of
the assistance to be derived from heathen authors.”
13.This testimony is true.230 How worthiness soever the witness may have been, 231 yet the truth
which has been spoken by him is acknowledged by Paul. The inhabitants of Crete, of whom he
speaks with such sharpness were undoubtedly very wicked. The Apostle, who is wont to reprove
mildly those who deserved to be treated with extreme severity, would never have spoken so harshly
of the Cretans, if he had not been moved by very strong reasons. What term more reproachful than
these opprobrious epithets can be imagined; that they were “lazy, devoted to the belly, destitute of
truth, evil beasts?” Nor are these vices charged against one or a few persons, but he condemns the
whole nation.
It was truly a wonderful purpose of God, that he called a nation so depraved, and so infamous
on account of its vices, to be among the first who should partake of the gospel; but his goodness is
not less worthy of admiration, in having bestowed heavenly grace on those who did not even deserve
to live in this world. 232 In that country so corrupt, as if in the midst of hell, the Church of Christ
held a position, and did not cease to be extended, though it was infected by the corruption of the
evils which prevailed there; for here Paul not only reproves those who were strangers to the faith,
but expressly reproves those who had made a profession of Christianity. Perceiving that these vices
so hateful have already taken root, and are spreading far and wide, he does not spare the reputation
of the whole nation, that he may attempt the care of those whom there was some hope of healing.
Wherefore rebuke them sharply  Of that circumspection and prudence with which a bishop ought
to be endowed, it is not the least part, that he regulate his manner of teaching by the dispositions
and conduct of men. We must not deal with obstinate and unruly persons in the same manner as
with those who are meek and teachable; for, in instructing the latter, we ought to use such mildness
as is suitable to their teachable disposition, while the stubbornness of the former must be severely
corrected, and (as the saying is) for a bad knot there must be a bad wedge. 233 The reason why Titus
ought to be more sharp and severe in rebuking them has been already stated, namely, that they are
“evil beasts.”
That they may be sound in the faith  Whether the “soundness” or “healthfulness” is here contrasted
with the diseases which he has mentioned, or whether he simply commands them to remain in the
sound faith, is uncertain. I prefer the latter view. As they already are exceedingly vicious, and may
230 “The general character of the Cretans, noticed in Paul’s Epistle to Titus, is confirmed by the testimony of antiquity. The
Apostle, writing to Titus, who had been left in Crete to regulate the affairs of the Christian Church in that island, complains of
many disorderly men there, — ‘many unruly and vain talkers and deceivers, who subvert whole houses, (or families,) teaching
things which they ought not, for filthy lucre’s sake, ( Titus 1:10, 11 ); and he quotes the following verse from ‘one of themselves,
a prophet of their own,’ namely, Epimenides, who was a Cretan poet, and whose writings were by the ancients termed     μ   or
‘oracles,’
                  ,           ,               .
The general import of which passage is, that ‘the Cretans were a false people, and united in their character the ferocity of
the wild beast with the luxury of the domesticated one.’ The circumstance of Paul’s styling Epimenides ‘a prophet’ is sufficiently
explained by the fact of the words Poet and Prophet being often used promiscuously by the Greeks and Romans, — probably
because their poets pretended to be inspired, and were by some believed to be so. The Apostle adds, that the testimony of
Epimenides is but too true, ‘this witness is true.’ How true the first part of it is, with respect to their deceit and lying, the following
facts will attest. From the time of Homer, the island of Crete was regarded as the scene of fiction. Many authors affirm that, as
a people, its inhabitants were infamous for their violation of truth; and at length their falsehood became so notorious, that
to Cretise, or imitate the Cretans, was a proverbial expression among the ancients for lying.”  — Horne’s Introduction.
231 “Combien que l’autheur soit profane et de nulle authorite .” — “Although the author is a heathen and of no authority.”
232 “De vivre en ce monde .”
233 “A un mauvais noeud il faut un mauvais coin .”
easily be corrupted more and more, he wishes them to be more closely and strictly kept within the
pure faith. 234
14And may not listen to Jewish fables  He now shews in what “sound faith” consists — when
it is not corrupted by any “fables.” But in guarding against the danger he prescribes this remedy
— not to give ear to them; for God wishes us to be so attentive to his word, that there shall be no
entrance for trifles. And, indeed, when the truth of God has once gained admission all that can be
brought against it will be so tasteless, that it will not attract our minds. If, therefore, we wish to
preserve the faith uncontaminated, let us learn carefully to restrain our senses, so that they may not
give themselves up to strange contrivances; for, as soon as any person shall begin to listen to fables,
he will lose the purity of faith.
All trivial inventions he calls “fables,” or, as we would say, “trifles;” for what he immediately
adds, about “the commandments of men,” has the same meaning. And he calls those men enemies
of the truth  who , not satisfied with the pure doctrine of Christ, mix up with them their own fooleries;
for all that men of themselves contrive ought to be accounted “fabulous.”
He attributes this vice chiefly to the Jews, because, under the presence of the divine law, they
introduced superstitious ceremonies. The Gentiles, being aware that they had been wretchedly
deceived during their whole life, more easily renounced their former course of life; while the Jews,
having been educated in the true religion, obstinately defended the ceremonies to which they had
been accustomed, and could not be convinced that the Law had been abrogated. In this manner
they disturbed all churches, because, as soon as the gospel began to make its appearance anywhere,
they did not cease to corrupt its purity by mixing it with their leaven. Accordingly, Paul not only
forbids them, in general terms, to degenerate from sound doctrine, but points out, as with the finger,
the present evil which needed to be remedied, that they may be on their guard against it.
15To the pure all things indeed are pure  He glances at one class of fabulous opinions; for the
choice of the kinds of food, (such as was temporarily enjoined by Moses,) together with purifications
and washings, were insisted on as being still necessary, and they even made holiness to consist
almost wholly in these minute observances. How dangerous to the Church this was, we have already
explained. First, a snare of bondage was laid on the consciences; and next, ignorant persons, bound
by this superstition, had a veil drawn over their eyes, which hindered them from advancing in the
pure knowledge of Christ. If any of the Gentiles refused to submit to this yoke, because he had not
been accustomed to it, the Jews vehemently contended for it, as if it had been the chief article of
religions. Not without good reason, therefore, does Paul firmly oppose such corrupters of the gospel.
In this passage, indeed, he not only refutes their error, but wittily laughs at their folly, in laboring
anxiously, any advantage, about abstaining from certain kinds of food and things of that nature
In the first clause of this verse he upholds Christian liberty, by asserting, that to believers nothing
is unclean; but at the same time he indirectly censures the false apostles who set no value on inward
234 “We have to observe that here, in a single word, Paul declares to us by what means men may defend themselves. It is, by
keeping the purity of faith. If, then, we do not turn aside from the simple doctrine of the gospel, but wish to be governed according
to the will of God; if we are not carried away by our volatile passions, and do not walk according to our groveling appetites; in
short, if we are good scholars of our God, and reckon it enough to have received the doctrine which he teaches us; if that be the
case, we shall be fortified against all evil. It is true, the devil will seek to poison the whole world with his venom, and will spread
his filth everywhere, so that the world will be full of so many corruptions that every place shall be infected by them. But however
that may be, we must not turn aside from time simplicity of our faith, and must always seek to be instructed simply by our God.
When we follow this course, though the devil may contrive all that he can, still we shall be fortified against all evil.”— Fr. Ser.
purity, which alone is esteemed by God. He therefore rebukes their ignorance, in not understanding
that Christians are pure without the ceremonies enjoined by the Law; and next he chastises their
hypocrisy, in disregarding uprightness of heart, and occupying themselves with useless exercises.
But as the subject now in hand is not the health of the body, but peace of conscience, he means
nothing else than that the distinction of the kinds of food, which was in force under the Law, has
now been abolished. For the same reason it is evident, that they do wrong, who impose religious
scruples on consciences in this matter; for this is not a doctrine intended for a single age, but an
eternal oracle of the Holy Spirit, which cannot lawfully be set aside by any new law.
Accordingly, this must be true till the end of the world, that there is no kind of food which is
unlawful in the sight of God; and, therefore, this passage is fitly and appropriately quoted in
opposition to the tyrannical law of the Pope, which forbids the eating of flesh on certain days. And
yet I am not unacquainted with the sophistical arguments which they employ. They affirm, that
they do not forbid the eating of flesh, because they allege that it is unclean, (for they acknowledge
that all kinds of food are in themselves clean and pure,) but that abstinence from flesh is enjoined
on another ground, that it has a tendency to tame the lust of the flesh; as if the Lord had forbidden
to eat swine’s flesh, because he judged swine to be unclean. Even under the Law the fathers reckoned
that everything which God created is in itself pure and clean; but they held that they were unclean
for this reason, that the use of them was unlawful, because God had forbidden it. All things are,
therefore, pronounced by the Apostle to be pure, with no other meaning than that the use of all
things is free, as regards the conscience. Thus, if any law binds the consciences to any necessity
of abstaining from certain kinds of food, it wickedly takes away from believers that liberty which
God had given them.
But to the polluted and unbelieving nothing is pure.  This is the second clause, in which he
ridicules the vain and useless precautions of such instructors. He says that they gain nothing by
guarding against uncleanness in certain kinds of food, because they cannot touch anything that is
clean to them. Why so? Because they are “polluted,” and, therefore, by their only touching those
things which were otherwise pure, they become “polluted.”
To the “polluted” he adds the “unbelieving,” 235 not as being a different class of persons; but
the addition is made for the sake of explanation. Because there is no purity in the sight of God but
that of faith, it follows that all unbelievers are unclean. By no laws or rules, therefore, will they
obtain that cleanness which they desire to have; because, being themselves “polluted,” they will
find nothing in the world that is clean to them. 236
235 “The Apostle joins ‘defiled’ and ‘unbelieving,’ to intimate that, without a true belief, nothing is clean. The understanding
and the conscience are polluted. Both the man and his doings are impure.” — Hervey.
236 “It is a dreadful condemnation pronounced on men, when it is said that nothing is clean to them — that all is polluted and
defiled, till God has renewed them. So far are we from being able to bring anything that is acceptable to him, that we can neither
eat nor drink, nor put on our clothes, nor walk a single step, without corruption, and, what is more, by dwelling in the world we
infect all the creatures. And this is the reason why they must call for vengeance at the last day against all unbelievers and
reprobates. We have, therefore, good reason to be dissatisfied with ourselves and to be ashamed, when we see that they become
hateful on our account and that we are so polluted as to have infected every thing that God had appropriated to our use, and even
that there is nothing in us but all corruption — nothing but a God cursed and disowned. When we are thus humbled, let us know,
on the other hand, the inestimable blessing which God bestows on us, when he brings us back to himself, and, after having
cleansed us, causes us to use all his blessings and bounties: with purity of heart and when we are assured that it is lawful for us
to eat and drink, provided that we do so with all sobriety, and in a reasonable manner.” — Fr. Ser.
But their mind and conscience are polluted.  He shows the fountain from which flows all the
filth which is spread over the whole life of man; for, unless the heart be well purified, although
men consider works to have great splendor, and a sweet smell, yet with God they will excite disgust
by their abominable smell and by their filthiness.
“The Lord looketh on the heart,” ( 1 Samuel 16:7 ,)
and
“his eyes are on the truth.” ( Jeremiah 5:3 .)
Whence it arises, that those things which are lofty before men are abomination before God.
The mind denotes the understanding, and the conscience relates rather to the affections of the
heart. But here two things ought to be observed; first, that man is esteemed by God, not on account
of outward works, but on account of the sincere desire of the heart; and, secondly, that the filth of
infidelity is so great, that it pollutes not only the man, but everything that he touches. On this subject
let the reader consult Haggai 2:11-14 . In like manner Paul teaches that
“all things are sanctified by the word,” ( 1 Timothy 4:5 ,)
because men use nothing in a pure manner till they receive it by faith from the hand of God.
16They profess that they know God  He treats those persons as they deserve; for hypocrites,
who give their whole attention to minute observances, despise fearlessly what constitutes the chief
part of the Christian life. The consequence is, that they display their vanity, while contempt of God
is manifested in open crimes. And this is what Paul means; that they who wish to be seen abstaining
from one kind of food — indulge in wantonness and rebellion, as if they had shaken of the yoke;
that their conduct is disgraceful and full of wickedness, and that not a spark of virtue is visible in
their whole life.
For they are abominable, disobedient, and to every good work reprobate.  When he calls them,
           237abominable, he seems to allude to their pretended holiness, to which they gave their
earnest attention. But Paul declares that they gain no advantage, for they do not cease to be profane
and detestable. With good reason does he accuse them of disobedience; for nothing can be more
haughty than hypocrites, who exert themselves so laboriously about ceremonies, in order that they
may have it in their power to despise with impunity the chief requirements of the law. We may
appropriately interpret the word      μ    reprobate in an active signification; as if he had said, that
237 “1. They are said to be           , abominable , or shamefully addicted to all manner of evil. The word in the original, denotes
the heinousness of those practices in which they allow themselves; and is derived from a word that signifies to send forth an
offensive smell. For all sentiments of right and good are not so totally lost and obliterated among mankind, but that there are
some things which even pagans would detest. 2. They are said to be also         , disobedient , which expression imports perseverance
and obstinacy in an evil course. They will by no means — by no importunity — by no arguments whatever, be dissuaded from
practices so unjustifiable and detestable in their own nature. They are resolved to run on, whatever it costs them — to continue
in sin, and in the profession of religion at the same time, which is the greatest absurdity imaginable. 3. They are said, lastly, to
be                            μ  ,  reprobate to every good work ; which signifies a disinclination to everything that is good, to everything
that is worthy of praise. ‘The word may be taken, as it is observed, either actively or passively, and so may signify not only to
be disappointed by others, but to disapprove themselves; in which latter sense we must, at present, principally understand the
phrase. They disapprove all that which claims their approbation and esteem; and are disaffected to all that good which the religion
they profess would oblige them to the practice of. The expression, therefore, does not so much signify their omission of what is
good, as their disinclination to it; but it further denotes that, if they do anything at all in religion, it is what they neither delight
in, nor can endure. ‘Every good work’ is an expression of such latitude, that it may comprehend all the works of piety, mercy,
and common justice. And so it is fit we should understand it in this place. Whatever they do of this kind, their hearts are averse
to it, and they bear a disaffected mind to it all. And such as here described, persons may be found to be, notwithstanding their
profession.” — Howe.
they who wish to be thought so sagacious instructors in trifles — are destitute of judgment and
understanding as to good works.