---
layout: calvin-chapter
book_id: psalms
book_name: 诗篇
chapter: 119
total_chapters: 150
header-img: psalm-bg-mountain.jpg
date: 2026-04-30 20:06
---

PSALM 119
  [Aleph .]
1   Blessed are those who are upright in their  way, Walking in the law of Jehovah.
2   Blessed are those who keep his testimonies, Who with their  whole heart seek him.
3  , Surely they do not work iniquity, Who in his ways do walk.
4   Thou hast commanded That thy statutes be kept carefully.
5   O that my ways may be directed To the keeping of thy statutes!
6   Then shall I not be ashamed, When I shall have been attentive to all thy commandments.
7   I will celebrate thee with uprightness of heart, When I shall have learned the judgments of
thy righteousness.
8  , Thy statutes I will keep: Do not thou forsake me very far.
  [Beth .]
9   By what [ means ] shall a young man cleanse his way? By taking heed according to thy word.
10   With my whole heart have I sought thee; Let me not go astray from thy commandments.
11   In my heart I have hidden thy word, That I might not sin against thee.
12   Blessed art thou, O Jehovah! Teach me thy statutes.
13   With my lips have I declared All the judgments of thy mouth.
14   In the way of thy testimonies I have taken delight, As much as in all riches.
15   Upon thy statutes will I meditate, And I will consider thy paths.
16   In thy commandments will I delight myself; I will not forget thy words.
  [Gimel .]
17   Do good to thy servant, And I shall live and keep thy word.
18   Open mine eyes, And I shall behold the wonders of thy law.
19   I am a stranger on the earth: Hide not from me thy commandments.
20   Broken is my soul with the desire it hath To thy judgments at all times.
21   Thou hast destroyed the proud ones; Cursed are those who decline from thy commandments.
22   Remove from me reproach and contempt; For thy testimonies I have kept.
281John Calvin Comm on Psalms (V5)
23   Princes also have sat, against me they have spoken: Thy servant meditated upon thy statutes.
24   Also thy testimonies are my delights, The men of my counsel.
  [Daleth .]
25   Cleave to the dust doth my soul: Quicken me according to thy word.
26   I have declared my ways, and thou hast answered me: Teach me thy statutes.
27   The way of thy commandments make me to understand, And I will meditate upon thy
wonders.
28   Drop away doth my soul for grief: Raise me up according to thy word.
29   The way of falsehood remove from me, And thy law grant me graciously.
30   The way of truth I have chosen; Thy judgments I have set before me.
31   I have cleaved to thy testimonies, O Jehovah Let me not be put to shame.
32   The way of thy statutes I will run, When thou shalt have enlarged my heart.
  [He.]
33   Teach me, O Jehovah! the way of thy statutes, And I will keep it unto the end.
34   Make me to understand, and I will observe thy law, And keep it with my whole heart.
35   Direct me in the way of thy statutes; For in it is my delight.
36   Incline my heart to thy testimonies, And not to covetousness.
37   Turn away my eyes from seeing vanity; In thy way quicken me.
38   Confirm to thy servant thy word, Who to thy fear is devoted
39   Remove my reproach which I have dreaded, For thy judgments are good.
40   Behold! I have longed after thy commandments: In thy righteousness quicken me.
  [Vau.]
41   And let come to me thy mercies, O Jehovah! Thy salvation according to thy word.
42   And I will answer a word to him who reproacheth me; For I have trusted in thy word.
43   And take not from my mouth the word of truth utterly: Because for thy judgments I wait.
44   And I will keep thy law continually, For ever and ever.
45   And I will walk at large; For thy statutes I have sought.
46   And I will speak of thy testimonies before kings, And will not be ashamed.
47   And I will delight myself in thy commandments Which I have loved.
48   And I will lift up my hands to thy commandments Which I have loved; And I will meditate
upon thy statutes.
  [Zain .]
49   Remember thy word to thy servant, Upon which thou hast caused me to hope.
50   This is my consolation in my affliction; For thy word revives me.
51   The proud ones have derided me exceedingly: From thy law I have not declined.
52   I remembered thy judgments of old, O Jehovah! And comforted myself.
53   Terror hath seized upon me, Because of the ungodly who forsake thy law.
54   Thy statutes have been songs to me In the house of my pilgrimage.
55   I remembered in the night thy name, O Jehovah! And I will keep thy law.
56   This is done to me, Because thy statutes I have observed.
  [Cheth .]
282John Calvin Comm on Psalms (V5)
57  Thou art  my portion, O Jehovah! I have said that I will keep thy words. 389
58   I have sought thy face with my whole heart; Have mercy upon me according to thy word.
59   I thought upon my ways, And turned my feet to thy testimonies.
60   I made haste and delayed not To keep thy commandments.
61   The cords of the ungodly have caught hold of me; Thy law I have not forgotten.
62   At midnight I will rise to praise thee, Because of the judgments of thy righteousness.
63   A companion am I to all who fear thee, And who keep thy statutes.
64   Of thy mercy, O Jehovah! the earth is full: Thy statutes teach thou me.
  [Teth .]
65   Kindly hast thou dealt with thy servant, O Jehovah! According to thy word.
66   Goodness of taste and knowledge teach me; For thy commandments I have believed.
67   Before I was brought low I went astray; But now thy word I keep.
68   Good art thou, and beneficent: Teach me thy statutes.
69   Weaved a lie 390 against me have the proud ones; But as for me  I with my whole heart will
keep statutes.
70   Fat as grease is their heart; But as for me  I in thy law do delight.
71  It hath been  good for me that I have been afflicted, That I might learn thy statutes.
72   Better to me is the law of thy mouth Than thousands of gold and silver.
  [Yod.]
73   Thy hands have made and formed me; Make me to understand, and I shall learn thy
commandments.
74   Those who fear thee shall see me and rejoice; Because for thy word I have waited.
75   I have known, O Jehovah! that righteousness are thy judgments; And in truth thou hast
humbled me.
76   To thy word to thy servant.
77   Let come to me thy compassions, and I shall live; For thy law is my delight.
78   Ashamed let be the proud, for they have falsely wronged me: As for me I will meditate
upon thy precepts.
79   Let those turn unto me who fear thee, And have known thy testimonies.
80   Let my heart be sound in thy statutes, That I may not be put to shame.
  [Caph .]
81   Fainted for thy salvation hath my soul: For thy word I wait.
82   Failed have my eyes [ in looking ] for thy word, While I say, “When wilt thou comfort me?”
83   For I have been as a bottle in the smoke; And yet  thy statutes I have not forgotten.
84   How many are the days of thy servant? When wilt thou execute judgment on my persecutors?
85   The proud have digged pits for me, Which is not according to thy law.
86   All thy commandments are truth: Deceitfully do they persecute me; therefore  help thou
me.
87   Almost have they consumed me upon the earth; Yet I have not forsaken thy statutes.
88   According to thy goodness quicken me; And I will keep the testimony of thy mouth.
389 Here the reading in the Latin text is ambiguous. The above is the reading in the French version; and as determined by Calvin
in the Commentary.
390 In the French version it is, “have forged lies.”
283John Calvin Comm on Psalms (V5)
  [Lamed .]
89   For ever, O Jehovah! Thy word endureth in the heavens.
90   From generation to generation is thy truth: Thou hast established the earth, and it abideth.
91   By thy judgments they continue to this day; For all are thy servants.
92   Unless thy law had been  my delight, Then should I have perished in my affliction.
93   Never will I forget thy statutes, For in them thou hast quickened me.
94   Thine I am; O save me! For thy statutes I have sought.
95   For me wait do the ungodly to destroy me: But I consider thy testimonies.
96   In all perfection I have seen an end: Broad is thy commandment exceedingly.
  [Mem .]
97   O how have I loved thy law! All the day it is my meditation.
98   Than my adversaries thou hast made me wiser by thy commandments; Because for ever
they are with me.
99   Than all my teachers thou hast made me wiser; Because thy testimonies are my meditation.
100   Than the aged I have more understanding; Because thy statutes I have observed.
101   From every evil path I have restrained my feet, That I may keep thy word.
102   From thy judgments I have not declined; For thou thyself hast taught me.
103   How sweet to my palate have been thy words! More [ sweet ] than honey to my mouth!
104   By thy statutes I have gotten understanding; Therefore I have hated every path of falsehood.
  [Nun.]
105   A lamp to my feet is thy word, And a light to my path.
106   I have sworn and will make sure, To observe the judgments of thy righteousness.
107   I am afflicted exceedingly, O Jehovah! Quicken me according to thy word.
108   I Let the freewill offerings  of my mouth, I pray thee, be pleasing to thee, O Jehovah! And
thy judgments teach me.
109   My soul is in my hand continually; And thy law I have not forgotten.
110   Laid have the ungodly a snare for me: Yet from thy statutes I have not erred.
111   I have as [ my] inheritance thy testimonies for ever; For the joy of my heart are they.
112   I have inclined my heart to perform thy statutes For ever, and even to the end.
  [Samech .]
113  Crooked  thoughts I have hated; But thy law I have loved.
114   My hiding-place and my shield art thou: In thy word I have trusted.
115   Depart from me, ye wicked men! And I will keep the commandments of my God.
116   Sustain me by thy word, and I shall live: And make me not ashamed of my expectation.
117   Establish me, and I shall be safe, And I will consider thy statutes continually.
118   Thou hast trodden down all who go astray from thy statutes; For falsehood is their deceit.
119  As dross thou hast made to cease all the ungodly of the earth; Therefore I have loved thy
testimonies.
120   Tremble 391 for fear of thee did my flesh, And of thy judgments I was afraid.
  [Ain.]
121   I have done judgment and righteousness: Give me not up to my oppressors.
122   Become surety for thy servant for good, That the proud may not oppress me.
391 “Horruit .” — Lat.
284John Calvin Comm on Psalms (V5)
123   My eyes have failed for thy salvation, And for the word of thy righteousness.
124   Deal with thy servant according to thy goodness, And thy statutes teach thou me.
125   Thy servant am I, give me understanding, That I may learn thy testimonies.
126  It is time [ for thee ] to work, O Jehovah! For they  have destroyed thy law.
127   Therefore I have loved thy statutes Mere than gold and fine gold.
128   Therefore all thy commandments I have esteemed to be  altogether right: Every way of
falsehood I have hated:
  [Phe.]
129   Marvelous things are thy testimonies; Therefore observed them hath my soul.
130   The entrance of thy words is light, Giving understanding to the little ones.
131   My mouth I opened and panted, Because thy commandments I loved.
132   Look upon me and have pity upon me, According to thy judgment towards those who
love thy name.
133   My steps direct thou according to thy word, And let not any iniquity have dominion in
me.
134   Redeem me from the oppression of men, And I will keep thy precepts.
135   Thy face cause thou to shine upon thy servant, And teach me thy statutes.
136   Rivers of waters run from my eyes, Because they have not kept thy law.
  [Tsadde .]
137   Righteous art thou, O Jehovah! And right are thy judgments.
138   Thou hast commanded righteousness in thy testimonies, And truth exceedingly.
139   Consumed me hath my zeal, Because forgotten thy words have my adversaries.
140   Refined is thy word exceedingly: And thy servant hath loved it.
141   Small am I, and despised; [ Yet] thy precepts I have not forgotten.
142   Thy righteousness is righteousness for ever, And thy law is truth.
143   Trouble and anguish have come upon me; But thy commandments have been  my delights.
144   The righteousness of thy testimonies endureth  for ever; Make me to understand, and I
shall live.
  [Koph .]
145   I have cried with my whole heart; Answer me, O Jehovah! And thy statutes I will keep.
146   I have called upon thee, save me, And I will keep thy testimonies.
147   I have prevented the dawn of the morning, 392 and have cried: To thy word I have looked
up.
148   Prevented have my eyes the watches of the night , To meditate upon thy word.
149   My voice hear thou, according to thy mercy, O Jehovah According to thy judgment quicken
me.
150   Drawn near have the pursuers of malice; From thy law they have departed.
151   Near art thou, O Jehovah! And all thy commandments are truth.
152   From the beginning I have known from thy testimonies, That for ever thou hast founded
them.
  [Resh .]
153   Behold my affliction, and rescue me; For thy law I have not forgotten.
392 Literally, “I have prevented the twilight.” — But see the Commentary .
285John Calvin Comm on Psalms (V5)
154   Debate my cause, and redeem me; According to thy word quicken me.
155   Far from the ungodly is safety; Because thy statutes they have not sought.
156   Thy compassions are great, O Jehovah! According to thy judgments quicken me.
157   Many are my persecutors and my oppressors: From thy testimonies I have not declined.
158   I saw the perfidious, and chid them; Because thy word they have not kept.
159   Behold how thy commandments I have loved: According to thy clemency quicken me.
160   The beginning of thy word is truth; And to everlasting is all the judgment of thy
righteousness.
  [Shin .]
161   Princes have persecuted me without a cause Yet at thy word afraid hath been my heart.
162   Joyful am I over thy word, As he who hath found much spoil.
163   Deceit I have  hated and abhorred; Thy law I have  loved.
164   Seven times a day have I praised thee, Because of the judgments of thy righteousness.
165   Much peace have those who love thy law, And they have no stumbling-block.
166   I have waited for thy salvation, O Jehovah! And thy commandments I have done.
167   Kept hath my soul thy testimonies, And I have loved them exceedingly.
168   I have kept thy commandments and thy testimonies; For all my ways are before thee.
  [Thau .]
169   Come let my cry into thy presence, O Jehovah! According to thy word give me
understanding.
170   Come let my prayer into thy presence: According to thy word deliver me.
171   Speak shall my lips praise, When thou shalt have taught me thy statutes.
172   Speak shall my tongue of thy word; For all thy precepts are righteousness.
173   Let thy hand be to succor me; For thy commandments I have chosen.
174   I have longed for thy salvation, O Jehovah! And thy law hath been  my delights.
175   Live let my soul, and let it praise thee; And let thy judgments succor me.
176   I have wandered like a lost sheep; Seek thy servant, for thy statutes I have not forgotten.
