---
layout: calvin-chapter
book_id: psalms
book_name: 诗篇
chapter: 121
total_chapters: 150
header-img: psalm-bg-mountain.jpg
date: 2026-04-30 20:08
---

PSALM 121
The Psalmist, to encourage true believers confidently to trust in the aid of God, and to teach
them to betake themselves to his protection, first, affirms that, to whatever quarter we turn our eyes
it is impossible to find salvation anywhere else; and, in the second place, extols in lofty terms the
fatherly care of God in defending his faithful ones.
Song of Degrees.
Psalm 121:1-2
1. I will lift up my eyes to the mountains, whence my help will come 622. My help is from
Jehovah, who made heaven and earth.
 
l I will lift up my eyes to the mountains.  The inspired writer, whoever he was, seems, in the
opening of the Psalm, to speak in the person of an unbelieving man. As God prevents his believing
people with his blessings, and meets them of his own accord, so they, on their part, immediately
east their eyes directly upon him. What then is the meaning of this unsettled looking of the Prophet,
who casts his eyes now on this side and now on that, as if faith directed him not to God? I answer,
that the thoughts of the godly are never so stayed upon the word of God as not to be carried away
at the first impulse to some allurements; and especially when dangers disquiet us, or when we are
assailed with sore temptations, it is scarcely possible for us, from our being so inclined to the earth,
not to be moved by the enticements presented to us, until our minds put a bridle upon themselves,
and turn them back to God. The sentence, however, may be explained as if expressed in a conditional
form. Whatever we may think, would the Prophet say, all the hopes which draw us away from God
are vain and delusive. If we take it in this sense, he is not to be understood as relating how he
reasoned with himself, or what he intended to do, but only as declaring, that those lose their pains
who, disregarding God, gaze to a distance all around them, and make long and devious circuits in
quest of remedies to their troubles. It is indeed certain, that in thus speaking of himself, he exhibits
to us a malady with which all mankind are afflicted; but still, it will not be unsuitable to suppose,
that he was prompted to speak in this manner from his own experience; for such is the inconstancy
natural to us, that so soon as we are smitten with any fear, we turn our eyes in every direction, until
faith, drawing us back from all these erratic wanderings, direct us exclusively to God. All the
difference between believers and unbelievers in this respect is, that although all are prone to be
deceived, and easily cheated by impostures, yet Satan bewitches unbelievers by his enchantments;
whereas, in regard to believers, God corrects the vice of their nature, and does not permit them to
persevere in going astray. The meaning of the Prophet is abundantly obvious, which is, that although
all the helps of the world, even the mightiest, should offer themselves to us, yet we ought not to
62 Phillips, who thinks it “probable that that Psalm was written just as the Israelites were about to commence their journey to
their native land,” gives this explanation of the verse : “I will l lift up eyes to the mountains,  viz., Zion, Tabor, Carmel, etc.; but
especially to the first, as being the place of the ark, and consequently the place to which the Israelites directed their eyes, as to
a fountain of all good. There they looked for help as often as circumstances rendered expected assistance requisite, as we learn
from several passages in the Psalms. See Psalm 14:7 ; Psalm 20:3 .” In returning from Babylon, how many a longing and anxious
look would the Jews east to the hills of Palestine, and with how many stirring and sacred emotions would the sight of them fill
their minds!
38John Calvin Comm on Psalms (V5)
seek safety anywhere but in God; yea, rather, that when men shall have long wearied themselves
in hunting after remedies, now in one quarter and now in another, they will at length find. from
experience, that there is no assured help but in God alone. By the mountains, the Prophet means
whatever is great or excellent in the world; and the lesson he teaches is, that we ought to account
all such favor as nothing.
Farther, these two verses ought to be read connectedly, bringing out this sense: When I shall
have lifted up my eyes to the mountains, then I will at length experience that I have fallen into a
rash and unprofitable mistake, until I direct them to God alone, and keep them fixed upon him. It
is at the same time to be observed, that God in this place is not in vain honored with the title of
Creator of heaven and earth; it being intended hereby tacitly to rebuke the ingratitude of men,
when they cannot rest contented with his power. Did they in good earnest acknowledge him as
Creator, they would also be persuaded, that as he holds the whole world in his hand, and governs
it as seemeth good in his sight, he is possessed of infinite power. But when, hurried away by the
blind impetuosity of their passions, they have recourse to other objects besides him, they defraud
him of his right and empire. In this way ought we to apply this title of God to the case in hand. The
amount is, that whilst we are naturally more anxious than is needful in seeking alleviation and
redress to our calamities, especially when any imminent danger threatens us, yet we act a foolish
and mistaken part in running up and down through tortuous mazes: and that therefore we ought to
impose a restraint upon our understandings, that they may not apply themselves to any other but
God alone. Nor is the opinion of those unsuitable, who think that the Hebrew word   , el, which we
translate to, namely, to the mountains, is put for   , al, which signifies above, giving this sense, That
men, however high they may look, will find no true salvation except hi God.
Psalm 121:3-5
3. He will not suffer thy foot to stumble: he who keepeth thee will not slumber. 4. Behold! he
who keepeth Israel will not slumber nor sleep. 5. Jehovah is thy keeper; Jehovah is thy defence 63
on thy right hand.
 
3He will not suffer thy foot to stumble.  Here the Prophet, in order to recall the faithful to the
right path, and to defeat the influence of all the allurements which are wont to distract their minds,
affirms that whatever advantages worldly men are accustomed to desire or hope for from the world,
true believers will find abundantly and at hand in God alone. He not only attributes power to God,
but also teaches that He is so affectioned towards us, that he will preserve us in all respects in
perfect safety. As often as the power of God is extolled, there are many who immediately reply, It
is very true that he can do such and such things if he is so inclined, but we do not certainly know
what is his intention. In this passage, therefore, God is exhibited to the faithful as their guardian,
that they may rest with assured confidence on his providence. As the Epicureans, in imagining that
63 The Hebrew word is   , tsel, “a shadow;” and hence it has been supposed that the words, “thy shadow at thy right hand.,”
are a figurative expression, referring to the protection afforded by the shade of a tree against the scorching rays of the sun, or to
the custom which prevails in tropical climates especially, of keeping off the intense heat of the sun by a portable screen, such
as an umbrella or parasol. The word is often put for defense in general. Compare Numbers 14:9 ; Isaiah 30:2 ; Jeremiah 48:45
39John Calvin Comm on Psalms (V5)
God has no care whatever about the ‘world, extinguish all piety, so those who think that the world
is governed by God only in a general and confused manner, and believe not that he cherishes with
special care each of his believing people, leave men’s minds in suspense, and are themselves kept
in a state of constant fluctuation and anxiety. In short, never will the hearts of men be led in good
earnest to call upon God, until a persuasion of the truth of this guardianship is deeply fixed in their
minds. The Psalmist declares that the purpose for which God is our keeper, is, that he may hold us
up. The Hebrew word,    , mot, which is here used, signifies both a sliding or falling, and a trembling
or staggering. Now, although it often happens that the faithful stagger, yea, are even ready to fall
altogether, yet as God sustains them by his power, they are said to stand upright. And as amidst
the many dangers which every moment threaten us, it is difficult for us to get rid of all anxiety and
fear, the Prophet at the same time testifies, that God keeps watch unceasingly over our safety.
4.Behold! he who keepeth Israel will not slumber nor sleep.64 To recall each individual to the
consideration of the common covenant, he represents the Divine providence as extending to the
whole body of the Church. In order that each of us for himself may be assured that God will be
gracious to him, it behoves us always to begin with the general promise made to all God’s people,.
This form of expression, he will not slumber nor sleep, would be improper in other languages,
according to the idiom of which it should rather be, He will not sleep, yea, he will not slumber: but
when the Hebrews invert this order, they argue from the greater to the less. The sense then is, that
as God never slumbers even in the smallest degree, we need not be afraid of any ham befalling us
while he is asleep. The design of the Prophet is now obvious. To persuade true believers that God
has a special care of each of them in particular, he brings forward the promise which God made to
the whole people, and declares God to be the guardian. of his Church, that from this general principle,
as from a fountain, each might convey streams to himself. Accordingly immediately after, ( Psalm
121:5 ,) addressing himself to each in particular, he repeats, Jehovah is thy keeper, that no person
might hesitate to apply to himself that which belonged to the whole community of Israel. Besides,
God is called a defense at the right hand, to teach us that it is not necessary for us to go far in
seeking him, but that he is at hand, or rather stands at our side to defend us.
Psalm 121:6-8
6. The sun shall not smite thee by day, nor the moon by night. 657. Jehovah shall keep thee
from all evil; he will keep thy soul. 8. Jehovah will keep thy going out and thy coming in, henceforth
and for ever.
64 A notion was prevalent among the heathen, that their gods sometimes slept, and were not then conscious of the wants of
their worshippers. Elijah thus addressed in irony the followers of Baal, 1 Kings 18:27 :
“Cry aloud; for he is a god; either he is talking, or he is pursuing,
or he is in a journey, or peradventure he sleepeth,
and must be waked.”
Very different was the character of the guardian of Israel. He relaxed not his watchful care over his people by indulging in
light slumbers during the day, nor even by sleeping in the night, when the tired frame of man seeks and demands repose.
65 There seems to be an allusion in the first member to sun-strokes, which are very fatal in hot countries, sometimes inflicting
instant death, or being soon followed by death, while at other times, when the person lives, he continues through the remainder
of his days in a state of idiocy. Comparatively few survive and perfectly recover the effects of such a visitation. What the Psalmist
means by the smiting of the moon is at first sight not so obvious. Some suppose that he speaks in conformity with a popular
40John Calvin Comm on Psalms (V5)
 
6.The sun shall not smite thee by day.  By these forms of expression the Psalmist magnifies the
advantages which result to us from our having God present with us; and, by the figure synecdoche,
under one particular, he declares in general that the faithful shall be safe from all adversities,
defended as they are by Divine power. The language is metaphorical, the cold of night and the heat
of day denoting all kind of inconveniences. The sense then is, that although God’s people may be
subject in common with others to the miseries of human life, yet his shadow is always at their side
to shield them from thereby receiving any harm. The Prophet does not, however, promise the faithful
a condition of such felicity and comfort as implies an exemption from all trouble; he only, for the
purpose of assuaging their sorrows, sets before them this consolation — that being interested in
the Divine layout, they shall be secure from all deadly harm; a point which he unfolds more distinctly
in the following verses, where he tells us that God will so keep his own people from all evils, as to
maintain their life in safety. The statement in the text before us is indeed general, but he afterwards
specifies the chief parts of human life.
8.Jehovah will keep thy going out and thy coming in.  The sense is, Whatever thou shalt undertake
or engage in during thy life shall come to a happy and successful termination. God no doubt directs
by his Holy Spirit the, deliberations of his servants; but it appears to me, that this passage is rather
to be referred to prosperous issues. If, however, any one would give it a more extended meaning I
have no objection. It is enough for me to embrace that sense which is indisputably certain and solid,
That God will be the continual guide of his people, so that stretching out his hand to them he will
conduct them according to their hearts’ desire from the beginning even to the end. Farther, it is of
importance to mark the reason why the Prophet repeats so often what he had briefly and in one
word expressed with sufficient plainness. Such repetition seems at first sight superfluous; but when
we consider how difficult it is to correct our distrust, it will be easily perceived that he does not
improperly dwell upon the commendation of the divine providence. How few are to be found who
yield to God the honor of being a keeper, in order to their being thence assured of their safety, and
led to call upon him in the midst of their perils! On the contrary, even when we seem to have largely
experienced what this protection of God implies, we yet instantly tremble at the noise of a leaf
falling from a tree, as if God had quite forgotten us. Being then entangled in so many unholy
misgivings, and so much inclined to distrust, we are taught from the passage that if a sentence
couched in a few words does not suffice us, we should gather together whatever may be found
throughout the whole Scriptures concerning the providence of God, until this doctrine-” That God
always keeps watch for us” — is deeply rooted in our hearts; so that depending upon his guardianship
alone we may bid adieu to all the vain confidences of the world.
belief, which it is supposed prevailed in the East in his time, just as it does in the present day, respecting the deleterious influence
of the moonbeams on the human body, although there is no ground for such a belief, the moon no doubt getting the blame of
the injury done by the cold and dampness of the night. But the probability is, that by the striking of the moon he simply alludes
to the cold of the night, which has very baneful effects on the human frame, particularly in such oriental countries as Palestine,
where there is a sudden change from extreme heat in the day to extreme cold in the night.
41John Calvin Comm on Psalms (V5)
