---
layout: calvin-chapter
book_id: psalms
book_name: 诗篇
chapter: 124
total_chapters: 150
header-img: psalm-bg-mountain.jpg
date: 2026-04-30 20:08
---

PSALM 124
The Church having been providentially delivered from extreme peril, David exhorts true believers
to thanksgiving, and teaches them by this memorable example, that their safety depends solely
upon the grace and power of God.
A Song of Degrees of David.
Psalm 124:1-5
1. But for Jehovah, who was on our side, may Israel now say; 2. But for Jehovah who was on
our side, when men rose up against us; 3. They had then swallowed us up alive, when their wrath
was kindled against us; 4. The waters had then overwhelmed us, the torrent had gone over our
soul: 5. The proud waters 77 had then gone over our soul.
 
1.But for Jehovah, who was on our side.  Some expositors think that this Psalm describes the
very sad and calamitous condition of the Church when the, residue of the people were carried away
into Babylon. This opinion is, however, without any good foundation for the complaints made,
apply with equal propriety to the persecutions which the Church suffered under the tyranny of
Antiochus Epiphanes. It is another objection to this interpretation, that the Psalm bears in its
inscription the name of David, and historically recounts the deliverance which the people had
obtained from extreme danger by the power of God. To get quit of this difficulty they observe, that
what had not yet come to pass is described prophetically; but this is a forced conjecture, for the
Prophets usually speak of things to come in a different manner. It is more probable that David here
sets forth a known history, and exhorts the faithful to reflect upon the divine succor which they had
already actually experienced. I dare not, however, limit what is here spoken to David’s time. It is
indeed true that the heathen nations often waged war against the people of God, armed with such
power as to come rushing upon them with the impetuosity of a deluge; but as David does not specify
any particular instance, he is not, I conceive, to be understood as celebrating only some one
deliverance, but in general all the instances in which God had succoured his Church. The heathen
at many different times, as is well known, rose up against the Church, with such mighty hosts, that
she was brought almost to the verge of destruction. David then represents as in a mirror the uncertain
and changeable condition of the Church, just such as it had been from the beginning, to teach the
faithful that its stability had not been owing to its own intrinsic strength, but that it had been
preserved by the wonderful grace of God; and to habituate them to call upon God in the midst of
dangers.
2.But for Jehovah who was on our side.  It is not without cause that he twice repeats the same
sentence. So long as we are in danger our fear is immoderate; but no sooner are we delivered than
we lessen the greatness of our calamity, and Satan, deceiving us by this artifice, leads us to obscure
the grace of God. Since then, after having been wonderfully preserved by the Lord, we for the most
part devise all sorts of imaginary circumstances, in order to efface from our minds the remembrance
of his grace, David, by introducing the people as struck with amazement, purposely dwells upon
77 “Alors les eaux enfiees et impetueuses fussent ,” etc. —  Fr. “The swollen and impetuous waters had then,” etc. The epithet
proud is applied to the waves of the sea in Job 38:11 .
52John Calvin Comm on Psalms (V5)
the amplification of the danger. In these words a bridle is put upon us, to keep us meditating upon
our dangers, lest the sense of God’s grace should vanish from our minds. The common translation,
Had not the Lord been on our side, does not sufficiently express David’s meaning; for he affirms
that the deliverance and the salvation of the people proceeded from nothing else than God’s succor,
and at the same time shows that this succor was both certain and evident. Two things then are here
to be distinctly noticed; first, that the Lord had been at hand to afford aid to his servants, and had
taken their part; and secondly, that being already in a desperate condition, they could not by help
from any other quarter, or in another manner, have escaped from danger. Thus we are taught, that
men then only ascribe the glory of their preservation to God, when they are persuaded of his being
so favourably inclined towards them as to defend them and maintain them safe. In the second clause
there is extolled in high terms the infinite power of God, of which he had given abundant proof in
delivering the people, to teach us that such a manner of preserving does not belong to man. By the
noun    , adam, which when it is collective signifies men in general, David seems to denote a vast
number of enemies. The people of God, as if he had said, had not to contend merely against a few
men, or against one nation, but were assailed by almost the whole world; it being abundantly
manifest that all mankind were the enemies of the Jews.
When he says, ( Psalm 124:3 ,) They had swallowed us up alive,78 he not only expresses barbarous
cruelty, but also disproportion of strength. He describes then in the first place how violent was the
onset of the enemy, and secondly, how feeble and inadequate the Jews were to withstand them,
since these cruel beasts had no need of swords for slaughter, but without a battle or an effort of
strength, could easily devour that unwarlike and defenceless flock.
4.The waters had then overwhelmed us.  He embellishes by an elegant metaphor the preceding
sentiment, comparing the dreadful impetuosity of the enemies of the Jews to an inundation, which
swallows up whatever it meets with in its overflowing course. And he continues to preserve the
character of a man affrighted. He names the waters, next the torrent, thirdly, the proud  or impetuous
waters. He says, over us, and over our soul, as if, by presenting the thing to the eye, he intended
to strike terror into the people. And certainly this impassioned language ought to have all the effect
of a graphic representation, that the faithful might the better feel from what a profound gulf they
had been rescued by the hand of God. He only truly attributes his deliverance to God, who
acknowledges himself to have been lost before he was delivered. The adverb them is here either
demonstrative, as if the Psalmist had pointed to the thing with the finger, or it is taken for long ago.
The former signification is, however, more suitable to the present passage.
Psalm 124:6-8
78 “The metaphor may be taken from famished wild beasts attacking and devouring men, (Comp. 5:5,) or the reference may
‘be to the case of a man shut up alive in a sepulcher, ( Proverbs 1:12 ,) and ]left there to perish, or ( Numbers 16:30 ) swallowed
up by an earthquake ” —  Cresswell. “A figurative expression to intimate the savageness of the adversaries, alluding to the
practice of many predatory animals of swallowing their victims alive. Such is the well-known habit of many of the predatory
kinds of fish.” —  Phillips.
53John Calvin Comm on Psalms (V5)
6. Blessed be Jehovah! who gave us not for a prey to their teeth 797. Our soul has been rescued
as a bird from the snare of the fowlers; the snare has been broken, and we have been delivered 80
8. Our help is in the name of Jehovah, who made heaven and earth.
 
6.Blessed be Jehovah!  The Psalmist now exhorts the godly to a grateful acknowledgment of
the divine goodness, and as it were puts words into their mouth. Here also he shows by another
similitude, that it would have been all over with them had not God succoured them; affirming that
they were delivered not otherwise than if some one had plucked the prey from the teeth  of a wild
and cruel beast. Of the same import is the third similitude, That they were on all sides entrapped
and entangled in the snares of their enemies, even as little birds caught in the net lie stretched under
the hand of the fowler; and that when they were delivered, it was just as if one should set at liberty
birds which had been taken. The amount is, that the people of God, feeble, without counsel, and
destitute of aid, had not only to deal with blood-thirsty and furious beasts, but were also ensnared
by bird-nets and stratagems, so that being greatly inferior to their enemies as well in policy as in
open force, they were besieged by many deaths. From this it may be easily gathered that they were
miraculously preserved.
8.Our help is in the name of Jehovah.  David here extends to the state of the Church in all ages
that which the faithful had already experienced. As I interpret the verse, he not only gives thanks
to God for one benefit, but affirms that the Church cannot continue safe except in so far as she is
protected by the hand of God. His object is to animate the children of God with the assured hope,
that their life is in perfect safety under the divine guardianship. The contrast between the help of
God, and other resources in which the world vainly confides, as we have seen in Psalm 20:7 ,
“Some trust in chariots, and some in horses, but we will remember the name of the Lord our
God,”
is to be noticed, that the faithful, purged from all false confidence, may betake themselves
exclusively to his succor, and depending upon it, may fearlessly despise whatever Satan and the
world may plot against them. The name of God  is nothing else than God himself; yet it tacitly
conveys a significant idea, implying that as he has disclosed to us his grace by his word, we have
ready access to him, so that in seeking him we need not go to a distance, or follow long circuitous
paths. Nor is it without cause that the Psalmist again honors God with the title of Creator. We know
with what disquietude our minds are agitated till they have raised the power of God to its appropriate
elevation, that, the whole world being put under, it alone may be pre-eminent; which cannot be the
case unless we are persuaded that all things are subject to his will. He did not show once and in a
moment his power in the creation of the world and then withdraw it, but he continually demonstrates
it in the government of the world. Moreover, although all men freely and loudly confess that God
is the Creator of heaven and of earth, so that even the most wicked are ashamed to withhold from
him the honor of this title, yet no sooner does any terror present itself to us than we are convicted
of unbelief in hardly setting any value whatever upon the help which he has to bestow.
79 The Church’s escape, be it observed, as appears from verse third, is likened to a rescue from the jaws of a ferocious animal,
which swallows its prey quick, or alive.
80 The reader will perceive, that as the imagery goes on it becomes the more beautiful. Pleasing and tender ideas are associated
with the escape of an innocent bird from the snares which the art and cruelty of man had contrived, to deprive it of life, or rob
it of liberty.
54John Calvin Comm on Psalms (V5)
