---
layout: calvin-chapter
book_id: psalms
book_name: 诗篇
chapter: 126
total_chapters: 150
header-img: psalm-bg-mountain.jpg
date: 2026-04-30 20:08
---

PSALM 126
This Psalm consists of three parts. First, the Prophet exhorts the faithful, who had returned from
the captivity, to gratitude, and highly extols the grace displayed in their deliverance, to show them,
beyond all doubt, that they were brought back to their own country by the hand of God, and not by
a fortuitous conjuncture of circumstances, or by the favor of men. In the second part a prayer is
added, that God would perfect his own work which he had begun. Finally, although there was no
immediate prospect of a full restoration, yet he mitigates the feeling of weariness which delay might
occasion, and assures them, that though at present the seed was watered with tears, the harvest
would be joyous.
A Song of Degrees.
Psalm 126:1-3
1. When Jehovah brought back the captivity 85 of Zion, we were like those that dream. 2. Now
shall our mouth be filled 86 with laughter, and our tongue with rejoicing: now shall they say 87
among the heathen, Jehovah hath done great things for them. 3. Jehovah hath done great things
for us, whereof we have been made glad.
 
1.When Jehovah brought back the captivity of Zion, etc . It is unnatural and forced to suppose,
with some expositors, that this is a prediction of what was to come. For my part I have no doubt
that the Psalm was composed upon the return of the Jewish people from the Babylonish captivity;
and for this reason I have translated the verb     , beshub, in the past tense. Now, whoever was the
author of it, 88 whether one of the Levites or one of the Prophets, he affirms that the manner of their
deliverance was too wonderful to be attributed to fortune, in order to lead the faithful to the
conclusion that the prophecy of Jeremiah, which had assigned seventy years as the term of the
captivity, was truly fulfilled. ( Jeremiah 25:12 , and Jeremiah 29:10 .) By the verb dream, which
expresses the astonishing character of the event, he teaches us that there is no room left for
ingratitude. As often as God works by ordinary means, men, through the malignity of their natures,
usually exercise their ingenuity in devising various causes of the deliverance wrought, in order to
darken the grace of God. But the return of the Jewish people from the Babylonish captivity, having
been a miracle of such splendor as was sufficient to swallow up and confound all the thoughts of
men, it compels us. to own that it was a signal work of God. This is the reason why the Prophet
compares this deliverance to a dream. “So far,” he materially says, “is any mind from comprehending
this unparalleled benefit of God, that the bare thinking upon it transports us with amazement, as if
it were a dream, and not an event which had already taken place. What impiety, then, will it be,
not to acknowledge the author of it.” Moreover, he does not mean that the faithful were so dull of
understanding as not to perceive that they were delivered by the hand of God, but only that, judging
according to carnal sense and reason, they were struck with astonishment; and he was apprehensive
85 The abstract noun is put for the concrete, “the captivity of Zion” for “the captives of Zion” — those who were led away
captive from Zion. Accordingly, in the French version, Calvin uses the concrete —” Les captifs ;” —”The captives.”
86 “Ou, alors nostre bouche a este remplie .” — Fr. marg. “Or, then our mouth was filled.”
87 “Ou, alors on disoit .” — Fr. marg. “Or, then they said.”
88 Grotius and Amyraldus suppose that it was compiled by Ezra, after the Jews had begun to return from Babylon.
59John Calvin Comm on Psalms (V5)
lest, in reasoning with themselves about that redemption, as about an ordinary thing, they should
make less account of the power of God than it became them to do. The noun     , shibath, translated
captivity, might be rendered bringing back, as some do, which would give greater elegance to the
expression of the Psalmist, as in that case      would be a noun of the same verb which is used in
the beginning of the verse. 89 As, however, this makes little difference in regard to the sense, it is
enough to have noticed it to my readers in passing.
2.Now shall our mouth be filled with laughter.  The adverb of time,   , az, is commonly translated
then; but as the verbs are in the future tense, I have thought that it might not be improper to translate
tires — grow shall our mouth be filled, and now shall they say. If, however, we admit what some
Hebrew Doctors affirm, that the force of this particle is to change the future tense into the past, the
adverb then will be the appropriate word. The design of the Prophet is not at all obscure. He would
have the people so to rejoice on account of their return, as not to bury in forgetfulness the grace of
God. He therefore describes no ordinary rejoicing, but such as so fills their minds as to constrain
them to break forth into extravagance of gesture and of voice. At the same time he intimates that
there was good ground for this joy, in which it became the children of God to indulge, on account
of their return to their own land. As there was at that period nothing more wretched than for them
to live in captivity, in which they were in a manner dispossessed of the inheritance God had promised
them; so there was nothing which ought to have been more desirable to them than to be restored.
Their restoration to their own country having been therefore a proof of their renewed adoption by
God, it is not surprising to find the Prophet asserting that their mouth was filled with laughter, and
their tongue with exultation. With a similar joy does it become us at the present day to exult when
God gathers together his Church and it is an undoubted evidence that we are steel-hearted, if her
miserable dispersion does not produce in our minds grief and lamentation. The Prophet proceeds
farther, declaring that this miracle was seen even by the blind; for in that age of the world, as is
well known, the heathen were wandering in darkness like blind men, no knowledge of God having
shone upon them; and yet God’s power and operation were so conspicuous in that event, that they
burst forth into the open acknowledgment that God had done great things for his people.  So much
the more shame-fill then was the indifference of the Jews to be accounted, if they did not freely
and loudly celebrate God’s grace, which had acquired so much renown among the unbelieving.
The form of speech employed is also to be marked, which forcibly expresses the idea intended to
be conveyed, that the mighty power of God in this deliverance was known by the Gentiles. In the
following verse the Prophet repeats in his own person, and in that of the Church, the words uttered
by the heathen in the last member of the preceding verse. Let us at least, as if he had said, put forth
a confession corresponding to that which God has extorted from the unbelieving Gentiles. When
he adds that they were glad, there is an implied antithesis between this fresh joy and the long
continued sorrow with which they were afflicted in their captivity. he expressly declares that joy
was restored to them, to enable them the better to estimate the dismal condition from which they
had been extricated.
89 That is, it would be derived from    , shrub, he returned; whereas if it is rendered captivity, it is derived from    , shabah,
he led captive. The English Bible translators seem to have been uncertain whether     , shibath, is to be considered as derived
from the first of these verbs or from the second, their reading in the text being, “turned back our captivity,” and their marginal
rendering being, “returned the returning.” There is a play upon the words,    , “turn,” and     , “captivity.” It is to be observed
that the concluding part of the above sentence in the text is from Calvin’s French Commentary. There is nothing to represent it
in the Latin Version.
60John Calvin Comm on Psalms (V5)
Psalm 126:4-6
4. O Jehovah! bring back our captivity, 90 as rivers in the south. 915. They who sow in tears
shall reap in joy. 6. Going forth, he shall go and weep, carrying the price of the seed: coming, he
shall return with rejoicing, carrying his sheaves with him.
 
4. O Jehovah! bring back our captivity.  The second part of the Psalm, as I have said, contains
a prayer that God would gather together the residue of the captives. The Holy Spirit endited this
form of prayer for the Jews who were already come home to their own country, that they might not
forget their poor brethren who were still in exile. All the Jews, no doubt, had a door opened to
them, and perfect liberty granted them, to come out of the land of their captivity, but the number
of those who partook of this benefit was small when compared with the vast multitude of the people.
Some were kept from returning by fear, and others by sloth and want of courage, on seeing such
perils at hand as they apprehended they had not power to overcome, choosing rather to lie torpid
in their own filthiness, than to undertake the hardship of the journey. It is probable also that many
of them preferred their present ease and comfort to eternal salvation. What the Prophet Isaiah had
foretold was no doubt fulfilled, ( Isaiah 10:22 ,). That although the people were in number as the
sand of the sea, yet only a remnant of them should be saved. Since, then, many openly refused the
benefit when it was offered them, and as there were not; wanting many difficulties and impediments
to be encountered by those who availed themselves of this liberty granted them by the good pleasure
of the king, 92 so that it was only a few of sounder judgment and of a more intrepid heart, who dared
to move a foot — and even they with reluctance, — it is no wonder that the Prophet requires the
Church still to make supplication to God for the bringing back of the captivity. Along with this,
the state of those who had already returned is also to be noted; for their land being in the possession
of strangers, who were all their inveterate and sworn enemies, they were no less captives in their
own country than among the Babylonians. It was therefore necessary, on a twofold account, that
the Church should earnestly beseech God to gather together such as were dispersed; first, that he
would give courage to the timid, awaken the torpid, cause the besotted to forget their pleasures,
and stretch forth his hand to be a guide to all; and, secondly, that he would settle the body of the
people who had returned in liberty and ease.
As to the similitude which follows, many think the sense to be, that the bringing back of their
captivity prayed for would be as grateful to them as if water should flow through a desert. 93 We
90 Walford reads, “Bring back all our captives, O Jehovah!” “The word all,” says he, “is not in the Hebrew text, but is necessary
to the sense; for some had returned, and others were returning or about to return.” Some of the captive Jews came back to their
own land in the reign of Cyrus, others in the reign of Darius, and the rest in the reign of Xerxes. Such therefore as had been the
first to return, may be supposed to pray in these words for the restoration of their brethren.
91 Phillips translates in the dry place. “The noun    ,” says he, “in its usual acceptation, signifies south; but its primary sense
is that of dryness, in which it is used in Joshua 15:19 ; Judges 1:15 ; where           is opposed to        , springs of water. ” In the
Septuagint the reading is, like the torrents m the parched land.’ Street has —
“Jehovah hath restored us from our captivity,
As he restoreth the torrents in the dry country.”
French and Skinner in like manner read “in a thirsty land.”
92 “Precaria libertas .” —  Lat. “Ceste liberte obtenue d’eux par le bon plaisir du Roy .” — Fr.
93 Walford reads, “like the streams of the south.” — “In the southern districts of Palestine and Arabia,” says he, “the heat is
so vehement during some seasons as to dry up the rivers completely, and parch the soil. When rains come, the torrents again
61John Calvin Comm on Psalms (V5)
know how grievous and painful a thing it is to travel in a hot country through and sands. The south,
is taken for the wilderness, because the region on the south of Judea was waste and almost
uninhabitable. Yet it seems to me more just to say, that the grace of God is here magnified, and
still more enlarged by the Prophet’s comparing it to a miracle. “Although it is a difficult matter,”
he substantially says, “for the dispersed remnant to be again united into one body, yet God, if he
please, can do this, just as he can cause rivers of water to flow through a parched desert.” He, at
the same time, alludes to the road intervening between Judea and Babylon, as appears from the
situation of the two countries. Thus the words will not require any supplement, the meaning being
simply this, that the bringing back of their captivity would be as if a river should run through a
barren and and country. And, certainly, to open up a way for the people who, so to speak, were
swallowed up in a deep gulf, was as if a course had been opened up for irrigating waters to flow
through a desert.
5.They who sow in tears shall reap in joy.  This sentence , in my opinion, ought not less to be
extended to the future than understood of the past. The carrying away of the Jews into Babylon
was to them as a seed-time; 94 God having, by the prophecy of Jeremiah, encouraged them to hope
for the harvest. Still, it was not without very great heaviness and anguish of heart that they were
dragged into such long continued captivity. It was, as if in the time of dearth the poor husbandman,
who already experiences the gnawings of hunger, were compelled to abridge himself of his ordinary
food in order to provide for the coming year; and although this is a hard and distressing case, he is
yet moved to sow from the hope of the harvest. The Jews then, when led into captivity, were,
doubtless, no less sorrowful than he who, in the time of scarcity, casts the precious seed into the
ground; but afterwards a joyful harvest followed, when they were delivered; for the Lord restored
to them gladness, like that which is experienced in a most abundant increase. 95 I, however, also
conceive that the Prophet exhorts the faithful to patience in reference to the future. The restoration
of the Church was not yet completed, and even, for the two reasons which I have a little before
specified, that period was evidently the time of sowing. Although the edict of the king frankly
invited the Jews to return, yet only a few of many returned, gradually and fearfully, in small
companies. Moreover, those who did so were unkindly and harshly welcomed by their neighbors,
and to so much trouble were they subjected that their former bondage appeared equally tolerable.
Whence we gather, that they had still to suffer — the full time of harvest, not having yet arrived;
and, therefore, the Prophet, not without cause, exhorts them strenuously to labor, and to persevere
in the midst of continual difficulties without fainting, until they found themselves placed in more
favorable circumstances. With respect to the words, some translate.    , meshech, a price; and others,
a basket or seed vessel.96 For the latter translation there is no foundation. Those who translate price
flow, and the soil is refreshed and verdant; — a delightful image of the joy experienced by captives on returning to their native
land.”
94 “Fuit Judteis sun migratio sationis instar .” —  Lat. “Le tranaport des Juifs en Babvlone leur a este comme un temps de
semence  ” — Fr
95 The word then may be prefixed to this verse: then, ie., when thou hast brought back the captives, they that sowed in tears
shall reap in joy.” —  Cresswell.
96 “   . This word has been variously interpreted; for as it is found only here and in Job 28:18 , its signification is uncertain. In
the Syriac we have it rendered by a word which signifies a skin and hence J. D. Michaelis proposes to take     for a sack made
of skin. So Aben Ezra thinks ‘that it is the name of a measure in which there is seed.’ The author of Mendlessohn’s Beor, approves
of this comment, and observes, that     was a small cup made of skin.’ The root is    , to draw out.’ We should, however, adhere
as strictly to the meaning of the root if we render the expression as Gesenius has done, by the drawing of the seed, i.e., the
62John Calvin Comm on Psalms (V5)
quote in support of their version that passage in the book of Job 28:18  “The price of wisdom is
above rubies.” But as the verb    , mashach, from which this noun is derived, signifies to extend or
to draw out, it may perhaps, both here and in that other place, be more fitly taken in its proper
signification. In the text quoted from Job it is profound wisdom, and not intellectual acuteness,
which is commended, and thus the extending of wisdom, that is to say, a continual course of wisdom,
is, from its being deeply grounded, better than pearls. In like manner, in the passage before us, the
drawing out of the seed is applied to the husbandmen themselves, implying, that they extend and
prolong their life when they sow. If, however, the word price  is preferred, the sense will be, that
when corn is scarce, seed is committed to the ground with tears, because it is precious and costly.
This doctrine extends still farther. Our life is, in other parts of Scripture, compared to the seed-time,
and as it will often happen that we must sow in tears, it becomes us, lest sorrow should weaken or
slacken our diligence, to raise our minds to the hope of the harvest. Besides, let us remember that
all the Jews who were carried captives into Babylon did not sow; for as really among them, who
had hardened themselves against God and the Prophets, had despised all threatenings, so they lost
all hope of returning. Those in whom such despair brooded were consumed in their miseries; but
those who were sustained by the promise of God, cherished in their hearts the hope of harvest,
although in a time, of extreme scarcity they cast their seed into the ground, as it were, at venture.
In order then that joy may succeed our present sorrow, let us learn to apply our minds to the
contemplation of the issue which God promises. Thus we shall experience that all true believers
have a common interest in this prophecy, That God not only will wipe away tears from their eyes,
but that he will also diffuse inconceivable joy through their hearts.
strewing or sowing of the seed. I think, however, Michaelis’s rendering is the best, as fitting with the preceding word    ; and so
we have carrying the sack of seed, at the end of the first hemistich, which corresponds with carrying his sheaves at the end of
the second.” —  Phillips. On the margin of our English Bible it is “seed-basket.” Street reads, “Bearing the vessel with the seed;”
Horsley, “He that goeth, and weeping beareth the seed to be drawn forth; French and Skinner, “Bearing seed for his sowing;”
Fry, “Sowing his seed,” observing, that     expresses the action of casting the seed into the ground; and Walford, “Carrying seed
for sowing.” “Literally it is,” says Cresswell, “a drawing forth of seed, i.e., as much as the sower, putting his hand into whatever
contained the seed, could take out at once. Amos 9:13 .”
63John Calvin Comm on Psalms (V5)
