---
layout: calvin-chapter
book_id: psalms
book_name: 诗篇
chapter: 127
total_chapters: 150
header-img: psalm-bg-mountain.jpg
date: 2026-04-30 20:08
---

PSALM 127
This Psalm shows that the order of society, both political and domestic, is maintained solely
by the blessing of God, and not by the policy, diligence, or wisdom of men; and that the procreating
of children is his peculiar gift.
A Song of Degrees of Solomon.
Psalm 127:1-2
1.97 Except Jehovah build the house, those who build it labor in vain except Jehovah keep the
city the watchman watcheth in vain. 2. It is in vain for you in hastening to rise early, to. go late to
rest, to eat the bread of sorrows: for 98 thus will he give sleep to his beloved.
 
1.Except Jehovah build the house.  There is no reason why the Jews should deny that this Psalm
was composed by Solomon. They think that the letter  , lamed, which we translate of, is equivalent
to, in behalf of Solomon; which is at variance with common usage, for such a title in all cases
designates the author. Accordingly, they absurdly devise a new sense, for which there is no necessity,
it being very suitable for Solomon, who was endued with the spirit of wisdom hi the affairs of
government, to discourse of things which he knew and had experience about. In affirming that God
governs the world and the life of man, he does so for two reasons: First, whatever prosperous event
may fall out to men, their ingratitude is instantly manifested by their ascribing it wholly to
themselves; and thus God is defrauded of the honor which is his due. Solomon, to correct such a
perverse error, declares, that nothing happens prosperously to us except in so far as God blesses
our proceedings. Secondly, his purpose was to beat down the foolish presumption of men, who,
setting God aside, are not afraid to undertake to do anything, whatever it may be, in exclusive
reliance upon their own wisdom and strength. Stripping them, therefore, of that which they
groundlessly arrogate to themselves, he exhorts them to modesty and the invocation of God. He
does not, however, reject either the labor, the enterprises, or the counsels of men; for it is a
praiseworthy virtue diligently to discharge the duties of our office. It is not the will of the Lord that
we should be like blocks of wood, or that we should keep our arms folded without doing anything;
99 but that we should apply to use all the talents and advantages which he has conferred upon us. It
is indeed true that the greatest part of our labors proceeds from the curse of God; and yet although
men had still retained the integrity of their primitive state, God would have had us to be employed,
even as we see how Adam was placed in the garden of Eden to dress it. ( Genesis 2:15 .) Solomon,
therefore, does not condemn watchfulness, a thing which God approves; nor yet men’s labor, by
which when they undertake it willingly, according to the commandment of God, they offer to him
all acceptable sacrifice; but lest, blinded by presumption, they should forcibly appropriate to
themselves that which belongs to God, he admonishes them that their being busily occupied will
profit them nothing, except in so far as God blesses their exertions. By the word house  he means
not only a building of wood or stone, but he comprehends the whole domestic order and government
97 “Augustine beautifully applies the language of this Psalm to Christian ministers and pastors, as God’s builders and watchmen
of his Church. How vain their labors without the grace and power of God!” — Fry.
98 For is supplied from the French version.
99 “Ou que nous demeurions les bras eroisez sans rien faire .” — Fr.
64John Calvin Comm on Psalms (V5)
of a family, even as a little after by the word city he denotes not only the buildings or enclosure of
the walls, but also the general state of the whole commonwealth. There is likewise a synecdoche
in the words builder and keeper; for he intends to say in general that whatever labor, foresight, and
skill men may employ in maintaining a family, or in preserving a city, will be to no purpose unless
God grant from heaven a prosperous issue to the whole.
It behoves us to remember what I have just now touched upon, that since the minds of men are
commonly possessed with such headstrong arrogance as leads them to despise God, and to magnify
beyond measure their own means and advantages, nothing is of more importance than to humble
them, in order to their being made to perceive that whatever they undertake it shall dissolve into
smoke, unless God in the exercise of pure grace cause it to prosper. When philosophers argue
concerning the political affairs of a state they ingeniously gather together whatever seems to them
to answer their purpose — they acutely point out the means of erecting a commonwealth, and on
the other hand the vices by which a well-regulated state is commonly corrupted; in short, they
discourse with consummate skill upon everything that is necessary to be known on this subject,
except that they omit the principal point — which is, that men, however much they may excel in
wisdom and virtue, and whatever may be the undertakings in which they may engage, can effect
nothing, unless in so far as God stretches forth his hand to them, or rather makes use of them as
his instruments. Which of the philosophers ever acknowledged that a politician is nothing else but
an instrument guided by the hand of God? Yea, rather they held that good management on the part
of man constituted the chief cause of the happiness of the social body. Now, since mortal men thus
rise up with profane boldness to build cities, and to order the state of the whole world, the Holy
Spirit justly reproves such madness. Let us then so occupy ourselves, each according to the measure
of his ability and the nature of his office, as that at the same time the praise of the success attending
our exertions may remain exclusively with God. The partition which many devise — that he who
has behaved himself valiantly, while he leaves the half of the praise to God, may take the other half
to himself, is deserving of all condemnation. The blessing of God should have the whole share and
exclusively hold the throne.
Now, if our terrestrial condition depends. entirely upon the good pleasure of God, with what
wings shall we fly up into heaven? When a house is planned, or a certain manner of life is chosen
— yea, even when laws are enacted and justice administered, all this is nothing else than to creep
upon the earth; and yet the Holy Spirit declares, that all our endeavors in this way are fruitless and
of no value. So much the less to be borne with, then, is the folly of those who strive to penetrate
even into heaven by their own power. Farther, we may gather from this doctrine, that it is not
wonderful to find in the present day the state of the world so troubled and confused as it actually
is — justice put to flight in cities, the husband and the wife mutually accusing each other, fathers
and mothers complaining of their children — in short, all bewailing their own condition. For how
few are to be found who, in their vocation, turn to God, and who, being rather inflated with arrogance,
do not wickedly exalt themselves? God then justly renders this sad reward to ungrateful men when
he is defrauded of his honor. But were all men humbly to submit themselves to the providence of
God, there is no doubt that this blessing which Solomon here commends would shed its lustre on
all parts of our life, both public and private.
The verb    , amal, which we have translated to labor, signifies not only to employ one’s self
in something or other, but also to busy one’s self even to lassitude and distress. I have said that by
the word keepers is to be understood not only those who are appointed to keep watch, but all
65John Calvin Comm on Psalms (V5)
magistrates and judges. If they are characterized by vigilance, it is the gift of God. There is, however,
need of another vigilance — that of God; for unless he keep watch out of heaven no perspicacity
of men will be sufficient to guard against dangers.
2.It is vain for you in hastening to rise early.  Solomon now expresses more plainly that men
in vain wear themselves out with toiling, and waste themselves by fasting to acquire riches, since
these also are a benefit bestowed only by God. The more effectually to move them, he addresses
himself to every man in particular . It is,  says he, in vain for you  He particularizes two means which
are thought to contribute in an eminent degree to the amassing of riches. It is not surprising to find
those growing rich in a short time who spare no exertion, but consume night and day in plying their
occupations, and allow themselves only scanty fare from the product of their labor. Solomon,
however, affirms that neither living at a small expense, nor diligence in business will by themselves
profit anything at all. Not that he forbids us to practice temperance in our diet and to rise early to
engage in our worldly business; but to;stir us up to prayer, and to calling upon God, and also to
recommend gratitude for the divine blessings, he brings to nought whatever would obscure the
grace of God. Consequently, we shall then enter upon our worldly avocations in a right way when
our hope depends exclusively upon God, and our success in that case will correspond to our wishes.
But if a man, taking no account of God, eagerly makes haste, he will bring ruin upon himself by
his too precipitate course. It is not, therefore, the design of the Prophet to encourage men to give
way to sloth, so that they should think upon nothing all their life long, but fall asleep and abandon
themselves to idleness- his meaning rather is, that, in executing what God has enjoined upon them,
they should always begin with prayer and calling upon his name, offering to him their labors that
he may bless them. The expression, the bread of sorrows, may be explained in two ways, either as
denoting what is acquired by hard and anxious toil, or what is eaten with disquietude of mind; just
as we see parsimonious and close-handed persons, when they have scarcely tasted a bit of bread,
pulling back their hand from their mouth. It is of no great importance which of these senses is
adopted; for we are simply taught that parsimonious men profit nothing — no not even when through
their own niggardliness they grudge to eat as much as nature requires.
For thus will he give sleep to his beloved.  The inspired writer intimates that the blessing of
God, of which he has spoken, is actually seen in his children and servants. It will not suffice to
believe this doctrine — that whatever, men attempt is to no purpose; it is necessary that the promise
be added, in order to their being led with assured hope to perform their duty. The sentence may be
read either — he will give sleep to his beloved, or, he will give in sleeping; that is, he will give them
those things which unbelievers labor to acquire by their own industry. The particle,   , ken, thus, is
put to express certainty; 100 for with the view of producing a more undoubted persuasion of the truth
— 4hat God gives food to his people without any great care on their part — which seems incredible,
and a fiction, Solomon points to the thing as it were with the finger. He indeed speaks as if God
nourished the slothfulness of his servants by his gentle treatment; but as we know that men are
created with the design of their being occupied, and as in the subsequent Psalm we shall find that
the servants of God are accounted happy when they eat the labor of their hands, it is certain that
100 Walford reads — “He truly granteth sleep to his beloved;” and observes that the sentence is enfeebled by the word “so” in
the vulgar translation. “It most likely means,” he adds, “‘in truth,’ i.e., truly; and the sense will be, though all exertion is vain
without God, yet he truly bestows refreshing sleep, free from anxiety and excessive exertion, upon those who are the objects of
his love, inasmuch as they combine all their endearours with due regard to him.” Cresswell adopts the rendering of the Septuagint,
which is “since he giveth his beloved sleep.”
66John Calvin Comm on Psalms (V5)
the word sleep  is not to be understood as implying slothfulness, but a placid labor, to which true
believers subject themselves by the obedience of faith. Whence proceeds this so great ardor in the
unbelieving, that they move not a finger without a tumult or bustle, in other words, without
tormenting themselves with superfluous cares, but because they attribute nothing to the providence
of God! The faithful, on the other hand, although they lead a laborious life, yet follow their vocations
with composed and tranquil minds. Thus their hands are not idle, but their minds repose in the
stillness of faith, as if they were asleep. If it is again objected, that God’s people are often agitated
with distressing cares, and that, oppressed with pinching poverty, and destitute of all resources,
they are anxiously concerned about the morrow, I answer, that if faith and love to God were perfect
in his servants, his blessing, of which the Prophet makes mention, would be manifest. Whenever
they are tormented above measure, this happens through their own default, in not resting entirely
upon the providence of God. I farther add, that God punishes them more severely than unbelievers,
because it is profitable for them to be agitated by disquietude for a season, that at length they may
attain to this peaceful sleep. In the meantime, however, God’s grace prevails, and always shines
forth in the midst of darkness, in respect of his cherishing his children as it were by sleep.
Psalm 127:3-5
3. Lo! children are the heritage of Jehovah: the fruit of the womb is the reward which he
bestows. 1014. As arrows in, the hand of a strong man so are the children of youth. 1025. Blessed
is the man who shall have filled his quiver with them; for 103 they shall not be ashamed when they
speak with their enemies in the gate.
 
3.Lo! children are the heritage of Jehovah.  Solomon here adduces one instance in which, in a
particular manner, he would have us to recognize the truth which he has hitherto asserted generally
— that the life of men is governed by God. Nothing seems more natural than for men to be produced
of men. The majority of mankind dream, that after God had once ordained this at the beginning,
children were thenceforth begotten solely by a secret instinct of nature, God ceasing to interfere in
the matter; and even those who are endued with some sense of piety, although they may not deny
that He is the Father and Creator of the human race, yet do not acknowledge that his providential
care descends to this particular case, but rather think that men are created by a certain universal
motion. With the view of correcting this preposterous error, Solomon calls children the heritage
of God, and the fruit of the womb his gift; for the Hebrew word    , sachar, translated reward,
signifies whatever benefits God bestows upon men, as is plainly manifest from many passages of
Scripture. The meaning then is, that, children are not the fruit of chance, but that God, as it seems
101 “Fructus.  Merces, fructus ventris  ” —  Lat. “Le fruict du ventre est loyer qu’il donne  ” —  Fr.
102             , sons of youth, words which may signify children begotten by the father in his youth, as      -   , is a son begotten by
a parent in his old age, ( Genesis 37:3 ;) or the expression may denote youths, as         mean  strangers, (Psalm 18:45 .) Either
rendering, I apprehend, will be suitable on this occasion; for the object of the verse is doubtless to show, that a numerous progeny
is a great blessing to a man, and an important addition to his strength and safety; that they will be a defence to him in a time of
danger, and serve him to repel an enemy, as arrows do in the hand of a mighty man.” —  Phillips.
103 “Car ” —  Fr.
67John Calvin Comm on Psalms (V5)
good to him, distributes to every man his share of them. Moreover, as the Prophet repeats the same
thing twice, heritage and reward are to be understood as equivalent; for both these terms are set in
opposition to fortune, or the strength of men. The stronger a man is he seems so much the better
fitted for procreation. Solomon declares on the contrary, that those become fathers to whom God
vouchsafes that honor.
As the majority of children are not always a source of joy to their parents, a second favor of
God is added, which is his forming the minds of children, and adorning them with an excellent
disposition, and all kinds of virtues. Aristotle in his Politics very properly discusses the question
whether πολυτεκνια , that is, the having of many children, ought to be accounted among good things
or no; and he decides it in the negative, unless there is added εὐγενεια , that is, generosity or goodness
of nature in the children themselves. And assuredly it would be a far happier lot for many to be
without children, or barren, than to have a numerous offspring, proving to them only the cause of
tears and groans. In order, then, to set forth this blessing of God — the having offspring — in a
clear light, Solomon commends a virtuous and generous disposition in children. The similitude
introduced for this purpose is, that as an archer is armed ‘with a well-furnished bow, so men are
defended by their children, as it were with a bow and all arrow. This similitude might seem, at first
sight, a little too harsh; but if it is examined somewhat more closely, its elegance will be readily
admitted. The Prophet means that those who are without children are in a manner unarmed; for
what else is it to be childless but to be solitary? It is no small gift of God for a man to be renewed
in his posterity; for God then gives him new strength, that he who otherwise would straightway
decay, may begin as it were to live a second time.
The knowledge of this doctrine is highly useful. The fruitfulness even of the lower animals is
expressly ascribed to God alone; and if He would have it to be accounted his benefit that kine, and
sheep, and mares conceive, how inexcusable will be the impiety of men, if when he adorns them
with the honorable title of fathers, they account this favor as nothing. It is also to be added, that
unless men regard their children as the gift of God, they are careless and reluctant in providing for
their support, just as on the other hand this knowledge contributes in a very eminent degree to
encourage them in bringing up their offspring. Farther, he who thus reflects upon the goodness of
God in giving him children, will readily and with a settled mind look for the continuance of God’s
grace; and although he may have but a small inheritance to leave them, he will not be unduly careful
on that account.
5.They shall not be ashamed when they speak with their enemies in the gate.  Here Solomon
describes such children as, distinguished by uprightness and integrity, have no hesitation in rendering
an account of their life, that they may shut the mouths of the malevolent and of calumniators. In
ancient times, as is well known, judicial assemblies 104 were held at the gates of cities. He therefore
here speaks of the gate, as if in the present day one should speak of the bench, or the courts, or the
senate. Let it be observed that what is chiefly praised in children is innocence, that fathers may
estimate this grace at its true value. In the preceding clause he had compared children endued with
virtue and excellence of nature to arrows. Now, that no man may put a violent construction upon
this comparison, as if it were intended to give children leave, like robbers, to rush upon doing
mischief to such as come in their way, reckless of right and wrong, he expressly represents virtue
104 “Legitimos conventus .” —  Lat. “Les assemblees Judiciales .” —  Fr.
68John Calvin Comm on Psalms (V5)
and moral integrity as constituting the protection which they ought to afford to their fathers. He
teaches us, then, that the children which we ought to wish for, are not such as may violently oppress
the wretched and suffering, or overreach others by craft and deceit, or accumulate great riches by
unlawful means, or acquire for themselves tyrannical authority, but such as will practice uprightness,
and be willing to live in obedience to the laws, and prepared to render an account of their life.
Farther, although fathers ought diligently to form their children under a system of holy discipline,
yet let them remember that they will never succeed in attaining the object aimed at, save by the
pure and special grace of God. Solomon also tacitly intimates that however zealously we may be
devoted to the practice of integrity, we shall never be without detractors and slanderers; for if
integrity of life were exempt from all calumny, we would have no quarrel with our enemies.
69John Calvin Comm on Psalms (V5)
