---
layout: calvin-chapter
book_id: psalms
book_name: 诗篇
chapter: 129
total_chapters: 150
header-img: psalm-bg-mountain.jpg
date: 2026-04-30 20:08
---

PSALM 129
This Psalm teaches, in the first place, that God subjects his Church to divers troubles and
affections, to the end he may the better prove himself her deliverer and defender. The Psalmist,
therefore, recalls to the memory of the faithful how sadly God’s people had been persecuted in all
ages, and how wonderfully they had been preserved, in order by such examples to fortify their hope
in reference to the future. In the second part, under the form of an imprecation, he shows that the
divine vengeance is ready to fall upon all the ungodly, who without cause distress the people of
God.
A Song of Degrees.
Psalm 129:1-4
1. They have often afflicted me from my youth, let Israel now say: 2. They have often afflicted
me from my youth; but they have not prevailed against me. 3. The ploughers have plouched upon
my back, and made long their furrows. 1084. But Jellovah who is righteous, hath cut asunder the
cords of the wicked.
 
1.They have often afflicted me from my youth.  This Psalm was probably composed at a time
when the Church of God, reduced to a state of extreme distress, or dismayed by some great danger,
or oppressed with tyranny, was on the verge of total destruction. This conjecture, I conceive, is
supported by the adverb of time, now, which appears to me to be emphatic. It is as if the Prophet;
had said, When God’s faithful ones are with difficulty drawing their breath under the burden of
temptations, it is a seasonable time for them to reflect on the manner in which he has exercised his
people from the beginning, and from age to age. As soon as God has given loose reins to our enemies
to do as they please we are distressed with sorrow, and our thoughts are wholly engrossed with the
evils which presently harass us. Hence proceeds despair; for we do not remember that the patience
of the fathers was subjected to the like trial, and that nothing happens to us which they did not
experience. It is then an exercise eminently fitted to comfort true believers to look back to the
conflicts of the Church in the days of old, in order thereby to know that she has always labored
under the cross, and has been severely afflicted by the unrighteous violence of her enemies. The
most probable conjecture which occurs to me at present is, that this Psalm was written after the
Jews had returned from the Babylonish captivity, and when, having suffered many grievous and
cruel injuries at the hands of their neighbors, they hadn’t length almost fainted under the tyranny
of Antiochus Epiphanes. In this dark and troublous state of matters, the Prophet encourages the
faithful to fortitude, nor does he address himself to a few of them only, but to the whole body
without exception; and in order to their sustaining such fierce assaults, he would have them to
oppose to them a hope inspired by the encouraging consideration, that the Church, by patient
endurance, has uniformly proved victorious. Almost every word is emphatic. Let Israel now say ,
that is, let him consider the trials of the Church in ancient times, from which it may be gathered,
that the people of God have never been exempted from bearing the cross, and yet that the various
108 “Targ. lengthened out their ploughing, i.e., gave us no rest from their slavery, for the longer the furrows the more tedious
is the labor of the oxen.” —  Bythner.
74John Calvin Comm on Psalms (V5)
afflictions by which they have been tried have always had a happy issue. In speaking of the enemies
of Israel simply by the pronoun they, without being more specific, the Psalmist aggravates the
greatness of the evil more than if he had expressly named the Assyrians or the Egyptians. By not
specifying any particular class of foes, he tacitly intimates that the world is fraught with innumerable
bands of enemies, whom Satan easily arms for the destruction of good men, his object being that
new wars may arise continually on every side. History certainly bears ample testimony that the
people of God had not to deal with a few enemies, but that they were assaulted by almost the whole
world; and farther, that they were molested not only by external foes, but also by those of an internal
kind, by such as professed to belong to the Church.
The term youth  here denotes their first beginnings, 109 and refers not only to the time when God
brought the people out of Egypt, but also to the time when he wearied Abraham and the patriarchs
during almost their whole life, by keeping them in a condition of painful warfare. If these patriarchs
were strangely driven about in the land of Canaan, the lot of their descendants was still worse during
the time of their sojourning in Egypt, when they were not only oppressed as slaves, but loaded with
every kind of reproach and ignominy. At their departure from that land we know what difficulties
they had to encounter. If in tracing their history from that period we find seasons in which some
respite was granted them, yet they were not in a state of repose for any length of time, until the
reign of David. And although during his reign they appeared to be in a prosperous condition, yet
soon after troubles and even. defeats arose, which threatened the people of God with total destruction.
In the Babylonish captivity, all hope being well-nigh extinguished, they seemed as if hidden in the
grave and undergoing the process of putrefaction. After their return they obtained, with difficulty,
some brief intermission to take their breath. They were certainly often put; to the sword, until the
race of them was almost wholly destroyed. To prevent it, therefore, from being supposed that they
had received only some slight hurt, they are justly said to have been afflicted; as if the Prophet
placed them before our eyes as it were half-dead, through the treatment of their enemies, who,
seeing them prostrated under their feet, scrupled not to tread upon them. If we come to ourselves,
it will be proper to add the horrible persecutions, by which the Church would have been consumed
a thousand times, had not God, by hidden and mysterious means, preserved her, raising her as it
were from the dead. Unless we have become stupid under our calamities, the distressing
circumstances of this unhappy age will compel us to meditate on the same doctrine.
When the Prophet says twice, they have afflicted me, they have afflicted me , the repetition is
not superfluous, it being intended to teach us that the people of God had not merely once or twice
to enter the conflict, but that their patience had been tried by continual exercises. He had said that
they had commenced this conflict from their youth, intimating that they had been inured to it from
their first origin, in order to their being accustomed to bear the cross. He now adds, that their being
subjected to this rigorous training was not without good reason, inasmuch as God had not ceased,
by a continued course, to make use of these calamities for subduing them to himself. If the exercises
of the Church, during her state of childhood, were so severe, our effeminacy will be very shameful
indeed, if in the present day, when the Church, by the coming of Christ, has reached the age of
109 Hence it is said in Hosea 11:1  —
“When Israel was a child, then I loved him,
and called my son out of Egypt.”
Youth is in like manner ascribed to a people, in Isaiah 47:12, 15 ; Jeremiah 48:11 ; and Ezekiel 16:43 .
75John Calvin Comm on Psalms (V5)
manhood, we are found wanting in firmness for enduring trials. Matter of consolation is laid down
in the last clause, which informs us that the enemies of Israel, after having tried all methods, never
succeeded in realizing their wishes, God having always disappointed their hopes, and baffled their
attempts.
3.The ploughers have ploughed upon my back.110 Here the Prophet, by an apparent similitude,
embellishes his preceding statement respecting the grievous afflictions of the Church. He compares
the people of God to a field through which a plough is drawn. He says that the furrows were made
long, so that no corner was exempted from being cut up by the ploughshare. These words vividly
express the fact — that the cross has always been planted on the back of the Church, to make long
and wide furrows.
In the subsequent verse a ground of consolation under the same figure is subjoined, which is,
that the righteous Lord hath cut asunder the cords of the wicked  The allusion is to a plough, which,
as we all know, is tied with cords to the necks of the oxen. The language very aptly conveys the
idea, that the wicked, — since they would never have become tired or satiated in exercising their
cruelty, and also in consequence of their being well armed, — were prepared to proceed farther,
but that the Lord, in a way altogether unexpected, repressed their fury, just as if a man should
unyoke oxen from the plough by cutting in pieces the cords and thongs which tied them to it. Hence
we perceive what is the true condition of the Church. As God would have us contentedly to take
his yoke upon us, the Holy Spirit not unfitly compares us to an arable field, which cannot make
any resistance to its being cut, and cleaved, and turned up by the ploughshare. Should any one be
disposed to indulge in greater refinement of speculation, he might say that the field is ploughed to
prepare it for receiving the seed, and that it may at length bring forth fruit. But in my opinion the
subject to which the Prophet limits his attention is the afflictions of the Church. The epithet righteous,
with which he honors God, must, in a suitableness to the scope of the passage, be explained as
implying that, although God may seem to dissemble for a time, yet he never forgets his righteousness,
so as to withhold relief from his afflicted people. Paul in like manner adduces the same reason why
God will not always suffer them to be persecuted,
“Seeing it is a righteous thing with God to recompense tribulation to them that trouble you;
and to you who are troubled rest with us.” ( 2 Thessalonians 1:6, 7 ,)
It is a point worthy of special notice, that the welfare of the Church is inseparably connected
with the righteousness of God. The Prophet, also, wisely teaches us. that the reason why the enemies
of the Church did not prevail, was because God brought to nothing their enterprises, and did not
suffer them to go beyond what he had determined in his own mind.
110 According to Archbishop Seeker, this refers to severe scourging; and those who have witnessed this cruel infliction tell us
that the allusion is most expressive, the long weals or wounds left by the scourges at each stroke being most aptly compared
either to furrows, or (as the original admits) to the ridges between the furrows. With respect to the alleged incongruity of
ploughing, and making long furrows on the back, the Archbishop observes, “ Lacerare et secare tercum  are Latin phrases, and
ploughing is not much stronger, to express a severe scourging.” The language of the Psalmist may, however, without allusion
to any particular species of persecuting violence, be, as Calvin understands it, simply a strong image of cruel oppression. “The
persecutors of Israel,” says Walford, “are compared to ploughmen; because as they cut up, and as it were torture the surface of
the earth, so did the adversaries greatly and grievously distress these afflicted people.”
76John Calvin Comm on Psalms (V5)
Psalm 129:5-8
5. All who hate Zion shall be confounded, and turned backward. 6. They shall be as the grass
111 of the housetops’, which is withered before it comes forth: 7. With which the mower hath not
filled his hand, nor the gleaner his bosom. 1128. Neither have they who pass by said,  The blessing
of Jehovah be upon you: we bless you in the name of Jehovah. 113
 
5.All who hate Zion shall be confounded, and tutored backward.  Whether we take this as a
prayer or a promise, the Prophet has a respect to the time to come. Since all the verbs are in the
future tense, it is certainly a very appropriate interpretation to understand him as deriving from
times past instruction as to what is to be hoped for in future, even to the end. In whichever way we
understand the passage, he declares that the faithful have no reason to be discouraged when they
behold their enemies raised on high. The grass which grows upon the house-tops is not, on account
of its higher situation, more valuable than the blade of corn which in the low ground is trampled
under foot; for although it stands elevated above men’s heads, it is, in the first place, unprofitable;
and secondly, it quickly withers away. 114 The verb,    , shalaph,115 which we have translate comes
forth, is by some rendered, is plucked up. According to this translation the sense is, that without
the hand or labor of man the grass on the house-tops is dried up. But as the verb properly signifies
to be brought forth, or to come forth, the meaning, in my opinion, is that the grass’. on the housetops,
so far from continuing long in a state of freshness, withers and perishes at its first springing up,
because it has no root under it, nor earth to supply it with sap or moisture for its nourishment.
Whenever, then, the splendor or greatness of our enemies strikes us with fear, let us bring to our
recollection this comparison, that as the grass which grows upon the house-tops, though high, is
yet without root, and consequently of brief duration, so these enemies, the nearer they approach
the sun by the height of their pride, shall be the sooner consumed by the burning heat, since they
have no root, it being humility alone which draws life and vigor from God.
111 Fry reads “corn,” “     ,” says he, “evidently includes corn as well as grass.”
112 In the French version it is “ son aisselle ;” — “his arm-pit.”
113 “Here is an allusion to the custom of blessing; the reapers at their work; as in that instance recorded in the book of Ruth
2:4, ‘And behold, Boaz came from Bethlehem, and said unto the reapers, The Lord be with you; and they answered him, The
Lord bless thee.’” — Warner.  “Precisely the same customs of salutation which are here indicated still prevail in Mohammedan
Asia. Nearly the same form of words, implying the blessing and peace of God, is retained, and the neglect to give the salutation
is still an indignity and an insult ” —  Illustrated Commentary upon the Bible.
114 “In Judea, the roofs of the houses are flat, and covered with cement. On this the grass would not uncommonly grow: but,
being thin and weak, and its situation hot and exposed, it was speedily ‘dried up and withered.’ The same sort of architecture,
and the same appearances, are common in the East at this day.” —  Warner.
115     differently interpreted. By the greater number of persons it is translated, to extract, to pull out; and thus it is used in Ruth
4:7, 8 , and John 20:25 , ‘Before any one extracts the grass it withereth.’ The Septuagint has πρὸ τοῦ εκσπασθὢναι , and the
Vulgate, ‘ priusquam evellatur .’ Our translators have rendered           , ‘afore it groweth up,’ in which they are supported by Aquila
and Symmachus. Theodoret observes that many MSS. of the Septuagint have ἐξανθὢναι  for ἐκσπασθὢναι . In either case the
sense is, that the haters of Zion shall be exterminated by the just and wonderful judgments of God, before they have time to
accomplish their wicked intentions. ” — Phillips. “Parkhurst adopts Harmer’s opinion, that the Hebrew verb in this place signifies,
‘to push out, unsheath, as corn its ear.’ It appears nowhere else but in the sense of ‘unsheathing a sword,’ or drawing off a shoe.’
The proper translation seems to be, ‘Which withereth before it unsheaths its ear.’ See Parkhurst on    .” —  Mant.
77John Calvin Comm on Psalms (V5)
7With which the mower hath not filled his hand.116 We have here an additional confirmation
of the truth, that although the wicked mount high or elevate themselves, and form an extravagant
opinion of their own importance, yet they continue mere grass, not bringing forth any good fruit,
nor reaching a state of ripeness, but swelling only with fresh appearance. To make this obvious,
the Psalmist sets them in opposition to fruit-bearing herbs, which in valleys and low grounds produce
fruit for men. In fine, he affirms that they deserve to be hated or despised of all, whereas commonly
every one in passing by the corn fields blesses them and prays for the harvest? 117 Farther, he has
borrowed this illustration of his doctrine from the affairs of ordinary life, we are taught that whenever
there is a hopeful prospect of a good harvest, we ought to beseech God, whose peculiar province
it is to impart fertility to the earth, that he would give full effect to his blessing. And considering
that the fruits of the earth are exposed to so many hazards, it is certainly strange that we are not
stirred ‘up to engage in the exercise of prayer from the absolute necessity of these to man and beast.
Nor does the Psalmist, in speaking of passers by blessing the reapers, speak exclusively of rite
children of God, who are truly taught by his word that the fruitfulness of the earth is owing to his
goodness; but he also comprehends worldly men in whom the same knowledge is implanted
naturally. In conclusion, provided we not only dwell in the Church of the Lord, but also labor to
have place among the number of her genuine citizens, we will be able fearlessly to despise all fire
might of our enemies; for although they may flourish and have a great outward show for a time,
yet they are but barren grass, on which the curse of heaven rests.
116 “Whereof the mower hath not filled his hand, etc. — i.e., It is too scanty to afford employment for a labourer to gather it
by the hand, or for a reaper, who uses a sickle, depositing what he cuts in the fold of his garment, or as Le Clerc understands it,
under his left arm. The Psalmist in effect prays, that the enemies of Israel may be reduced to such poverty, that none could
become richer by despoiling them: in a word, that they might be altogether despicable. For binding up the sheaves, Hammond
suggests, gathereth the handfuls, with reference to the gleaner, Ruth 2:2  ” —  Cresswell.
117 “Au lieu que chacun communement en passant par les bleds les benit, et prie pour la moisson .” — Fr.
78John Calvin Comm on Psalms (V5)
