---
layout: calvin-chapter
book_id: psalms
book_name: 诗篇
chapter: 131
total_chapters: 150
header-img: psalm-bg-mountain.jpg
date: 2026-04-30 20:08
---

PSALM 131
David, having it as his object in this Psalm to encourage the people to fight strenuously under
his banner, and to exhort and excite the godly to acknowledge him as entitled to their obedience,
declares that he had always submitted himself to the guidance of God, and had done nothing without
his call and commission.
A Song of Degrees of David.
Psalm 131:1
1. O Jehovah! My heart has not been elated, nor have mine eyes been lifted up, neither have
I walked in great matters, or in, things shut up from me.
 
1. O Jehovah! My heart has not been elated  David had been made head over God’s people, and
in order to prove that he was their lawful prince, entitled to the allegiance of the faithful, he is
desirous to show that he had not been influenced, in anything which he had attempted, by ambition
or pride, but had submitted himself with a quiet and humble spirit to the divine disposal. In this he
teaches us a very useful lesson, and one by which we should be ruled in life — to be contented
with the lot which God has marked out for us, to consider what he calls us to, and not to aim at
fashioning our own lot  to be moderate in our desires, to avoid entering upon rash undertakings,
and to confine ourselves cheerfully within our own sphere, instead of attempting great things. He
denies that his heart had, been lifted up,  for this is the true cause of all unwarranted rashness and
presumption in conduct Is not pride what leads men, under the instigation of their passions, to dare
such presumptuous flights, to hurry on recklessly in their course, and throw the whole world into
confusion? Were this loftiness of spirit checked, the consequence would be, that all men would
study moderation of conduct. His eyes were not; lifted up; there were no symptoms of pride in his
looks or gestures, as elsewhere ( Psalm 18:28 ) we find proud looks condemned. Something more
than this, however, may be intended, That while he put a restraint upon the risings of ambition in
his heart, he was careful that his eyes should not lend their assistance to the heart in any covetous
aspirations after greatness. All the senses, in short, as well as his heart, were subjected to the
restraints of humility. In denying that he walked in, or was conversant with, great things, he must
be supposed to refer to the disposition or temper of his soul. For, to hold as he did the office of a
Prophet, to be invested with regal dignity, nay, to sit upon the sacred throne of the only-begotten
Son of God, not to speak of other distinctions with which he was honored above the generality of
men, were great things. But the expression was applicable, in so far as he strictly confined himself
to the one object of being serviceable to God and to the Church. Should any still be inclined to lay
an undue stress upon the word which is here employed, I would observe that the words from or
above me, at the close of the verse, are to be considered as connected with what David here says
of great things, as well as of the things shut up,  or hidden, so that we may read I have not walked
in great things which are above me. The question, therefore, was not whether the lot of David was
mean or exalted; it is enough that he was careful not to pass beyond the proper bounds of his calling.
He did not think himself at liberty to move one step unless called to it by God.
His submission in such matters stands contrasted with the presumption of those who, without
any call from God, hurry themselves into unwarrantable undertakings, and involve themselves in
86John Calvin Comm on Psalms (V5)
duties which properly belong to others; for so long as we have a clear call from God things cannot
be said to be shut up or hidden from us, or too great for us, provided we stand ready for all obedience;
and, on the other hand, those who yield themselves up to the influence of ambition will soon lose
themselves in a labyrinth of perplexity. We see how God confounds the proud and boasted enterprises
of the children of this world. They run the full course of their wild career, they turn the earth upside
down at their pleasure, and put forth their hand in every direction; they are filled with complacency
at the thought of their own talents and industry, and, in a moment, when all their plans have been
fully formed, they are entirely overthrown, because there is no solidity in them. There are two
different forms which the presumption of those takes who will not submit to be humble followers
of God, but must needs run before him. Some rush forward with a reckless precipitancy, and seem
as if they would build to the skies; others do not so openly exhibit the inordinateness of their desires,
are slower in their movements, and cautiously calculate upon the future, and yet their presumption
appears no less from the very fact, that, with a total oversight of God, as if heaven and earth were
subject to them. they pass their decree as to what shall be done by them some ten or twenty years
hereafter. These build, as it were, in the deep sea. But never shall it come to the surface, however
extended may be the term of their lives; while those who, like David, submit themselves to God,
keeping in their own sphere, moderate in their desires, will enjoy a life of tranquillity and assurance.
Psalm 131:2-3
2. If I have not set, and quieted and my soul like one that is weaned frown his mother,  My
soul is over me as a weaned child. 3. Israel shall hope in Jehovah from henceforth, and for ever.
 
2.If I have not set,  etc. He here employs a figure which appropriately explains what he meant,
and likens himself to a weaned child; by which is intended, that he dismissed all the anxieties which
disquiet the man of ambition, and was willing to be satisfied with small things. This assertion,
which some might be inclined to disbelieve, he makes with an oath, expressed in that particular
form of which I have elsewhere taken notice, in which the imprecation is not directly brought
forward, but left to be understood, to teach us caution in the use of God’s name. 124 As to the words,
to set his soul like a child, is as if he had said, that he would frame it into such a likeness. And this
with the view, as he declares, of composing himself to silence. For       domaintee, is formed from
   dum, and has the active sense of reducing to silence. The quiet of soul he alludes to is opposed
to those tumultuous desires by which many cause disquietude to themselves, and are the means of
throwing the world into agitation. The figure of childhood is elsewhere used in another sense, to
convey reprehension. ( Isaiah 28:9 .)
“Whom shall I teach knowledge?
them that are weaned from the milk? and drawn from the breasts?”
124 “  -  , A formula of swearing which may be translated surely or indeed. I have surely so disposed and disciplined my soul
as to remove it from any longing after great things, from any ambitious tendencies.” — Phillips.
87John Calvin Comm on Psalms (V5)
where the Prophet censures the people for their slowness of apprehension, and being as incapable
of profiting by instruction as infants. In the passage now before us, what is recommended is that
simplicity of which Christ spake,
“Unless ye become like this little child, ye shall in no wise enter into the kingdom of God.” 125
(Matthew 18:3 )
The vain desires with which men are carried away, originate in their seeking to be wise and
careful above what is necessary. David adds accordingly, my soul over me is quieted,  not as
expressing the language of self-confidence, but speaking as if his soul lay sweetly and peacefully
on his bosom, undisturbed by inordinate desires. He contrasts the wayward and tumultuous agitation
which prevails in those of a discontented spirit, with the peace which reigns in the man who abides
in the calling of the Lord. From the verse with which the Psalm closes, we see the reason why
David asserted his having undertaken nothing in the spirit of a carnal ambition. He calls upon Israel
to hope in the Lord, words which must have been abrupt had it not deeply concerned the common
safety of the Church, to know that he sat upon the throne of the kingdom by Divine appointment,
in which case the faithful would be certain of the bestowment of the promised blessing. Our hope
is of the right kind when we cherish humble and sober views of ourselves, and neither wish nor
attempt anything without the leading and approbation of God.
125 Of all explanations the best is that of considering the comparison to consist between the humbleness and simplicity of the
Psalmist’s mind, and that of a little child, in whom there does not exist a sufficient consciousness to create an ambition for any
worldly object. The comparison is not with     , a suckling; for it has a longing after the mother’s breast, and, therefore, such a
comparison would not be appropriate. The same, indeed, may be said of a child who has only just been weaned; for, in that stage,
how often does it cry and mourn after that of which it has been deprived, and the possession of which was just before its chief
pleasure? We therefore conclude, that the comparison is intended to be with a child who has been weaned a sufficient time to
have forgotten its infantile nutriment, and who is not conscious of any particular desires or cravings, and quietly resigns itself
to its mother’s care and training. — Phillips.
88John Calvin Comm on Psalms (V5)
