---
layout: calvin-chapter
book_id: psalms
book_name: 诗篇
chapter: 136
total_chapters: 150
header-img: psalm-bg-mountain.jpg
date: 2026-04-30 20:08
---

PSALM 136
The Psalmist reminds the Lord’s people, that unless they were assiduous in his praises, they
were chargeable with defrauding him of what was justly due to him for his benefits. And, in
mentioning each benefit, he takes particular notice of the mercy of God, to teach us how necessary
it is to the proper celebration of his praises that we own everything which we receive from him to
be bestowed gratuitously. 170
Psalm 136:1-9
1. Praise Jehovah, for he is good, for his mercy endureth for ever. 2. Praise the Cod of gods,
for his mercy endureth for ever. 3.. Praise the Lord of Lords, 171 for his mercy endureth for ever.
4. Who alone hath done great wonders, for his mercy endureth for ever, 5. Who made the heavens
by his wisdom, [or, intelligently,] for his mercy endureth for ever. 6. Who stretcheth out the earth
above the waters, for his mercy endureth for ever. 7. Who made the great lights, for his mercy
endureth for ever. 8. The sun for rule by day, for his mercy endureth for ever. 9. The moon and
stars for rule by night for his mercy endureth for ever.
 
1.For his mercy,172 etc. The insertion of this clause again and again in so many short and abrupt
sentences, may seem a vain repetition, but verses repeated by way of chorus are both allowed and
admired in profane poets, and why should we object to the reiteration in this instance, for which
the best reasons can be shown, Men may not deny the divine goodness to be the source and Fountain
of all their blessings, but the graciousness of his bounty is far from being fully and sincerely
recognised, though the greatest stress is laid upon it in Scripture. Paul in speaking of it, ( Romans
3:23,) calls it emphatically by the general term of the glory of God, intimating, that while God
170 This Psalm is called by the Jews, the Great Thanksgiving.
171 “The three first verses of this Psalm contain the three several names of the Deity, which are commonly rendered Jehovah,
God, and Lord, re spectively; the first having reference to his essence as self-existent, and being his proper name; the second
designating him under the character of a Judge or of an all-powerful being, if Aleim be derived from Al; and the third, Adoni,
representing him as exercising rule.” — Cresswell.
172 Jebb observes, that “the 136th Psalm is altogether peculiar in its construction, as it has the recurrence of the same words,
‘For everlasting is his mercy,’ at the end of every distich.” He adds, that “this elaborate artifice of construction seems characteristic
of that later period which comprised the captivity and restoration;” although he at the same time admits, that it is to be found in
Psalms of an earlier date than the Baby-lonish captivity, quoting a passage in the account of the dedication of Solomon’s Temple,
which informs us, that the whole choir of Israel united in praising God “for he is good; for his mercy endureth for ever:” and
observing that this expression forms the.commencement of three other Psalms, the Psalm 106 , Psalm 107 , and Psalm 118 . In
his remarks on the Psalm 119 , after adverting to the alphabetical character of that Psalm, he adds, “There are other artifices of
construction observable in the Psalms and Hymns composed in these later ages of the Church. For example, that repetition of
the same words and clauses, and the frequent recurrence of a characteristic word, so frequent in the Greater Hallel, [from the
Psalm 111  to Psalm 118 th, inclusive,] and in the Songs of Degrees: and in a continually recurring burden, in each distich, as in
the Song of the three Children, and Psalm 136 , which latter is unique in the Psalter. It has been the tendency of the poetry of
most countries, in the progress of time, to make its characteristic features depend less upon the exactness of sentimental
arrangement, and more upon some external artifice, whether this be prosodial metre, alliteration, rhyme, assonance, or the
recurrence of a burthen. Now, though the poetry of the Scriptures, because it was inspired, never declined from the perfection
of its sentimental construction, still those artificial contrivances, practiced, indeed, in earlier times, seem to have been more
prevalent at the time of the captivity, and the time immediately following, than heretofore. It was probably so ordained, for the
purpose of assisting the memories of the Jews, who at Babylon were excluded from the open exercise of their religion, and from
public teaching, and, therefore, required more private helps, which could be more easily communicated orally from parents to
children, or from masters to disciples.” —  Jebb’s Translation of the Psalms, etc., volume 2.
113John Calvin Comm on Psalms (V5)
should be praised for all his works, it is his mercy principally that we should glorify. It is evident
from what we read in sacred history, that it was customary for the Levites. according to the regulation
laid down by David for conducting the praises of God, to sing by response, “for his mercy endureth
for ever.” The practice was followed by Solomon in the dedication of the Temple, ( 2 Chronicles
7:3, 6 ,) and by Jehoshaphat in that solemn triumphal song mentioned in 2 Chronicles 20:21 , of the
same book. [Before proceeding to recite God’s works, the Psalmist declares his supreme Deity,
and dominion, not that such comparative language implies that there is anything approaching] Deity
besides him, but there is a disposition in men, whenever they see any part of his glory displayed,
to conceive of a God separate from him, thus impiously dividing the Godhead into parts, and even
proceeding so far as to frame gods of wood and stone. There is a depraved tendency in all to take
delight in a multiplicity of gods. For this reason, apparently, the. Psalmist uses the plural number,
not only in the word      , Elohim, but in the word       , Adonim, so that it reads literally, praise ye
the Lords of Lords: he would intimate, that the fullest perfection of all dominion is to be found in
the one God.
4. Who alone hath done great wonders  Under this term he comprehends all God’s works from
the least to the greatest, that he may awaken our admiration of them, for notwithstanding the signal
marks of inconceivably great wisdom and divine power of God which are inscribed upon them we
are apt through thoughtlessness to undervalue them. He declares that whatever is worthy of
admiration is exclusively made and done by God, to teach us that we cannot transfer the smallest
portion of the praise due to him without awful sacrilege, there being no vestige of divinity in the
whole range of heaven and earth with which it is lawful to compare or equal him. He then proceeds
to praise the wisdom of God, as particularly displayed in the skill with which the heavens are
framed, giving evidence in a surprising degree of the fine discrimination with which they are
adorned. 173 Next he comes to speak of the earth, that he may lead us to form a proper estimate of
this great and memorable work of God, stretching forth as it does a bare and dry superficies above
the waters. As these elements are of a spherical form, the waters, if not kept within their limits,
would naturally cover the earth, were it not that God has seen fit to secure a place of habitation for
the human family. This philosophers themselves are forced to admit as one of their principles and
maxims. 174 The earth’s expanded surface, and the vacant space uncovered with water, has been
justly considered therefore one of the great wonders of God. And it is ascribed to his mercy, because
his only reason for displacing the waters from their proper seat was that regard which he had in his
infinite goodness for the interests of man.
7.Who made the great lights, etc . — Moses calls the sun and moon the two great lights, and
there is little doubt that the Psalmist here borrows the same phraseology. What is immediately
added about the stars, is, as it were, accessory to the others. It is true, that the other planets are
larger than the moon, but it is stated as second in order on account of its visible effects. The Holy
Spirit had no intention to teach astronomy; and, in proposing instruction meant to be common to
the simplest and most uneducated persons, he made use by Moses and the other Prophets of popular
language, that none might shelter himself under the pretext of obscurity, as we will see men
sometimes very readily pretended an incapacity to understand, when anything deep or recondite is
173 “Les cieux sont composez d’un si excellent et bel artifice, qu’ils crient que c’est d’une facon admirable qu’ils ont este ornez
d’une si plaisante distinction .” — Fr.
174 “De mettre ceci entre lents principes et maximes .” — Fr.
114John Calvin Comm on Psalms (V5)
submitted to their notice. Accordingly, as Saturn though bigger than the moon is not so to the eye
owing to his greater distance, the Holy Spirit would rather speak childishly than unintelligibly to
the humble and unlearned. The same remark may be made upon what the Psalmist adds regarding
God’s having assigned the sun and moon their respective parts, making the one to rule the day, and
the other to rule the night, by which we are not to understand that they exercise any government,
but that the administrative power of God is very manifest in this distribution. The sun in illuminating
the earth through the day, and the, moon and stars by night, may be said to yield a reverential
homage to God.
Psalm 136:10-16
10. Who smote the Egyptians in their first-born, for his mercy endureth for ever. 11. And
brought out Israel from, the midst of them, for his mercy endureth for ever: 12. With a strong hand,
and with a stretched out arm, for his mercy endureth for ever. 13. Who divided the Red Sea into
divisions, for his mercy endureth for ever, 14. And made Israel to pass through the midst of it, for
his mercy endureth for ever. 15. And cast Pharaoh and his host headlong into the Red Sea, for his
mercy endureth for ever. 16. And led his people through the wilderness, for his mercy endureth
for ever.
 
10.Who smote the Egyptians in, their first-born  Some read with their first-born, but the other
rendering reads better. As we do not mean to sermonize upon the passage, it is unnecessary to
detain the reader here with many words, as nothing is mentioned but what has been treated elsewhere.
Only we may notice that the Egyptians are well said to have been smitten in their first-born, because
they continued in their outrageous obstinacy under the other plagues, though occasionally terrified
by them, but were broken and subdued by this last plague, and submitted. As it was not intended
to recount all the wonders successively done in Egypt, the whole is summed up in one word when
it is said, that he led his people forth from the midst of it with a mighty and a stretched out arm.
For pressed down as they were on every side, it was only by a wonderful display of divine power
that they could effect an escape. The figure of an outstretched arm  is appropriate, for we stretch
out the arm when any great effort is required; so that this implies that God put forth an extraordinary
and not a common or slight display of his power in redeeming his people. 175
13.Who divided the Red Sea  I have already ( Psalm 106:7 ) spoken of the word    , suph, and
have not therefore hesitated to render it the Red Sea  The Psalmist speaks of divisions  in the plural
number, which has led some Jewish authors to conjecture that there must have been more passages
than one — an instance of their solemn trifling in firings of which they know nothing, and of their
method of corrupting the Scriptures entirely with their vain fancies. ‘We may well laugh at such
fooleries, yet we are to hold them at the same time in detestation; for there can be no doubt that the
Rabbinical writers were led to this by the devil, as an artful way of discrediting the Scriptures.
Moses plainly and explicitly asserts that the heaps of waters stood up on both sides, from which
175 “Dieu en deliverant son peuple n’a point monstre une petite puissance ,” etc. — Fr.
115John Calvin Comm on Psalms (V5)
we infer that the space between was one and undivided. 176 But as the people passed through in
troops, and not one by one, the pathway being so broad as to admit of their passing freely men and
women, with their families and cattle, the Psalmist very properly mentions divisions, with a reference
to the people who passed through, this circumstance not a little enhancing the mercy of God, that
they saw large depths or channels dried up, so that they had no difficulty in advancing in troops
abreast. Another circumstance which confirmed or enhanced the mercy shown, was, that Pharaoh
was shortly afterwards drowned; for the very different issue proved that it could not be owing to
any hidden cause of a merely natural kind, that some should have perished, while others passed
over with entire safety. The distinction made afforded a conspicuous display of God’s mercy in
saving his people. Much is included in the single expression that God was the leader of his people
through the wilderness.  It was only by a succession of miracles of various kinds that they could
have been preserved for forty years in a parched wilderness, where they were destitute of all the
means of subsistence. So that we are to comprehend, under what is here stated, the various proofs
of divine goodness and power which are mentioned by Moses as having been vouchsafed, in feeding
his people with bread from heaven — in making water to flow from the rock — in protecting them
under the cloud from the heat of the sun — giving them a sign of his presence in the pillar of fire
— preserving their raiment entire — shielding them and their little ones in their exile wanderings
under tents of leaves, 177 with innumerable other instances of mercy which must occur to the reader.
Psalm 136:17-26
17. Who smote great kings, for his mercy endureth for ever. 18. And slew famous kings, for
his mercy endureth for ever. 19. Sihon, king of the Amorites, for his mercy endureth for ever. 20.
And Og, king of Bashan, for his mercy endureth for ever. 21. And gave their land for an heritage,
for his mercy endureth for ever. 22. An heritage to Israel his servant., for his mercy endureth for
ever. 23. Who remembered us in our humiliation, for his mercy endureth for ever. 24. And hath
rescued us from our oppressors, for his mercy endureth for ever. 25. Who giveth food to all flesh,
for his mercy endureth for ever.  26. Make acknowledgments to the God of heavens, for his mercy
endureth for ever.
 
23.Who remembered us in our humiliation  The six verses taken from the previous Psalm I pass
over without observation; and I shall only touch very briefly upon the others, which do not need
lengthened consideration. We may just observe that the Psalmist represents every age as affording’
displays of the same goodness as had been shown to their fathers, since God had never failed to
help his people by a continued succession of deliverances. It was a more notable proof of his mercy
to interpose for the nation at a time when it was nearly overwhelmed by calamities, than to preserve
it in its entire state and under a more even course of affairs, there being something in the emergency
to awaken attention and arrest the view. Besides, in all the deliverances which God grants his
people, there is an accompanying remission of their sins. In the close he speaks of the paternal
176 “Dont nous pouvons bien recueillir que l’espace d’entre deux estoit sans aucune separation .” — Fr.
177 “Sous des logettes de feuilles .” — Fr.
116John Calvin Comm on Psalms (V5)
providence of God as extending not only to all mankind, but to every living creature, suggesting
that we have no reason to feel surprise at his sustaining the character of a kind and provident father
to his own people, when he condescends to care for the cattle, and the asses of the field, and the
crow, and the sparrow. Men are much better than brute beasts, and there is a great difference between
some men and others, though not in merit, yet as regards the privilege of the divine adoption, and
the Psalmist is to be considered as reasoning from the less to the greater, and enhancing the
incomparably superior mercy which God shows to his own children.
117John Calvin Comm on Psalms (V5)
