---
layout: calvin-chapter
book_id: psalms
book_name: 诗篇
chapter: 138
total_chapters: 150
header-img: psalm-bg-mountain.jpg
date: 2026-04-30 20:08
---

PSALM 138
In this Psalm David, in remembrance of the singular help which had always been vouchsafed
him by God — the experience he had enjoyed of his faithfulness and goodness, takes occasion to
stir himself up to gratitude; and from what he had known of the divine faithfulness, he anticipates
a continuance of the same mercy. If dangers must be met, he confidently looks for a happy issue.
A Psalm of David.
Psalm 138:1-5
1. I will praise thee 189 with my whole heart, before the gods 190 will I sing psalms to thee. 2. I
will worship thee towards the temple of thy holiness, and sing unto thy name for thy mercy and
for thy truth; for thou hast magnified thy name above all things by thy word. 3. In the day when I
cried to thee then thou answeredst me, and hast abundantly ministered strength to me in my soul.
4. Let all kings of the earth praise thee, O Jehovah! because they have heard the words of thy
mouth. 5. And let theta sing in 191 the walls of Jehovah, for great is the glory of Jehovah.
 
1.I will praise thee with my whole heart  As David had been honored to receive distinguishing
marks of the divine favor, he declares his resolution to show more than ordinary gratitude. This is
exercise which degenerates and is degraded in the case of hypocrites to a mere sound of empty
words, but he states that he would return thanks to God not with the lips only, but with sincerity of
heart, for by the whole heart, as we have elsewhere seen, is meant a heart which is sincere and not
double. The noun      , Elohim, sometimes means angels, and sometimes kings, and either meaning
will suit with the passage before us. The praise David speaks of is that which is of a public kind.
The solemn assembly is, so to speak, a heavenly theater, graced by the presence of attending angels;
and one reason why the cherubim overshadowed the Ark of the Covenant was to let God’s people
know that the angels are present when they come to worship in the sanctuary. We might very
properly apply what is said here to kings, on account of their eminence in rank, as in Psalm 107:32 ,
“Praise ye the Lord in the assembly of the elders” — that is, as we should say, in an assembly of
an honored and illustrious kind. But I prefer the former sense, and this because believers in drawing
near to God are withdrawn from the world, and rise to heaven in the enjoyment of fellowship with
angels, so that we find Paul enforcing his address to the Corinthians upon the necessity of decency
and order, by requiring them to show some respect at least in their public religious assemblies to
189 Here “O Jehovah” is to be understood. Though it is not in the received Hebrew text, it was found in six copies examined
by Dr. Kennicott, and in eight examined by De Rossi. The Septuagint, Arabic, Vulgate, and AEthiopic versions add” Jehovah”
after the verb for “praise.” “The omission of the Divine name,” says Jebb, in his Translation of the Psalms, “in a passage like
this, at the beginning of the Psalm, is altogether unexampled.”
190 By the Hebrew word      , Elohim, translated gods, Calvin understands “angels” or “kings,” but particularly the former. It
is however proper to observe that      , Elohim, is one of the names applied to the Supreme Being in the sacred volume, and
therefore some critics translate “before God,” which they explain as meaning “before the ark,” where were the sacred symbols
of his presence. If after the Hebrew word for “before,” we should suppose “thee” to be understood, the reading would be “before
thee, or in thy presence, O God! will I sing praise unto thee.”
191 Phillips observes that the force of  , beth, seems to be that of concerning: — “‘The kings of the earth shall sing concerning
the ways of the Lord,’ how that they are good and merciful.”
124John Calvin Comm on Psalms (V5)
the angels. ( 1 Corinthians 11:10 .) The same thing was represented by God long before, under the
figure of the cherubim, thus giving his people a visible pledge of his presence.
2. I will worship towards the temple192 of thy holiness. H e intimates that he would show more
than private gratitude, and, in order to set an example before others, come in compliance with the
precept of the law into the sanctuary. He worshipped God spiritually, and yet would lift his eyes
to those outward symbols which were the means then appointed for drawing the minds of God’s
people upwards. He singles out the divine mercy and truth as the subject of his praise, for while
the power and greatness of God are equally worthy of commendation, nothing has a more sensible
influence in stimulating us to thanksgiving than his free mercy; and in communicating to us of his
goodness he opens our mouth to sing his praises. As we cannot taste, or at least have any lively
apprehensions in our souls of the divine mercy otherwise than through the word, mention is made
of his faithfulness or truth. This coupling of mercy with truth is to be particularly taken notice of,
as I have frequently observed, for however much the goodness of God may appear to us in its
effects, such is our insensibility that it will never penetrate our minds, unless the word have come
to us in the first place. Goodness is first mentioned, because the only ground upon which God shows
himself to us as true is his having bound himself by his free promise. And it is in this that his
unspeakable mercy shows itself — that he prevents those with it who were at a distance from him,
and invites them to draw near to him by condescending to address them in a familiar manner. In
the end of the verse some supply the copulative, and read — Thou hast magnified thy name and
thy word above all things193 This learned interpreters have rejected as a meagre rendering, and yet
have themselves had recourse to what I consider a forced interpretation , Thou hast magnified thy
name above all thy word  I am satisfied David means to declare that God’s name is exalted above
all things, specifying the particular manner in which he has exalted his name, by faithfully performing
his free promises. Nor can any doubt that owing to our blind insensibility to the benefits which
God bestows upon us, the best way in which he can awaken us to the right notice of them is by first
addressing his word to us. and then certifying and sealing his goodness by accomplishing what he
has promised.
3.In the day when I cried to thee, etc. Frequently God prevents our prayers, and surprises us,
as it were, sleeping: but commonly he stirs us up to prayer by the influence of his Spirit, and this
to illustrate his goodness the more by our finding that he crowns our prayers with success. David
well infers that his escape front danger could not have been merely fortuitous, as it plainly appeared
that God had answered him. This then is one thing noticeable, that our prayers more nearly discover
his goodness to us. Some supply a copulative in the second part of the verse — Thou hast increased
me, and in my soul is strength.  But this is not called for, since the words read well enough as they
stand, whether we render the passage as I have done above, or translate it, Thou hast multiplied,  or
increased, me with strength in my soul. The sense, is, That from a weak and afflicted state he had
192 This Psalm is entitled “a Psalm of David,” and Calvin considers him to be its author agreeably to the title; lint the mention
of “the temple” in the second verse seems to render such an opinion doubtful. If, however, we translate this word by “mansion,”
which is the proper rendering of the original — “the mansion of thy sanctity:” this objection to its composition by David falls
to the ground. In the Septuagint version the title of this Psalm is, “A Psalm of David; of Haggai and Zechariah, when they were
dispersed,” (comp. Ezra 5:1 ); meaning a Psalm of David, used by Haggai and Zechariah.
193 According to this mode of rendering the passage   , cal, the word for all, is independent of    , shimcha, the word for thy
name. But “it has been properly observed by Aben Ezra, that    in this case should have a Cholem, and not a Kametz Chateph,
with which it is found in all copies. Besides, this translation is not supported by any of the ancient versions.” —  Phillips.
125John Calvin Comm on Psalms (V5)
received fresh strength to his spirit Or some may, perhaps, prefer resolving it thus: Thou hast
multiplied — that is, blest me, whence strength in my soul.
4. Let all kings of the earth praise thee  Here he declares that the goodness he had experienced
would be extensively known, and the report of it spread over all the world. In saying that even
kings had heard the words of God’s mouth, he does not mean to aver that they had been taught in
the true religion so as to be prepared for becoming members of the Church, but only that it would
be well known everywhere that the reason of his having been preserved in such a wonderful manner
was God’s having anointed him king by his commandment. 194 Thus although the neighboring kings
reaped no advantage by that divine oracle, the goodness of God was illustrated by its being
universally known, by his being called to the throne in an extraordinary manner. Having uniformly
during the whole period of Saul’s severe and bloody persecution declared that he raised his standard
in God’s name, there could be no doubt that he came to the crown by divine will and commandment.
And this was a proof of divine goodness which might draw forth an acknowledgment even from
heathen kings.
Psalm 138:6-8
6. Because Jehovah the exalted will yet have respect to the lowly, and being high will know
afar off, [or, will know afar off him that is high.] 7. Should I will 195 in the midst of trouble thou
wilt revive me: thou wilt put forth thy hand against the wrath of mine enemies, and thy right hand
shall save me. 8. Jehovah will recompense upon me. 196 thy mercy, O Jehovah! is for ever; thou
wilt not forsake the works of thine own hand.
 
6.Because Jehovah the exalted, etc. In this verse he passes commendation upon God’s general
government of the world. The thing of all others most necessary to be known is, that he is not
indifferent to our safety; for though in words we are all ready to grant this, our disbelief of it is
shown by the feat’ we betray upon the slightest appearance of danger, and we would not give way
to such alarm if we had a solid persuasion of our being under his fatherly protection. Some read,
Jehovah on high, that is, he sits on his heavenly throne governing the world; but I prefer considering,
that there is an opposition intended — that the greatness of God does not prevent his having’ respect
to the poor and humble ones of the earth. This is confirmed by what is stated in the second clause,
That being highly exalted he recognises afar off, or from a distance. Some read    , gabah, in the
accusative case, and this gives a meaning to the words which answers well to the context, That God
does not honor the high and haughty by looking near to them — that he despises them — while,
with regard to the poor and humble, who might seem to be at a great distance from him, he takes
care of them, as if they were near to him. By some the verb    , yada, is rendered, to crush, and they
take the meaning to be, that God, while he favors the lowly, treads down the mighty who glory in
their prosperity. There is reason to doubt, however, whether any such refinement of meaning is to
194 “Sed hoc ubique fore notum, non alia de causa mirabiliter servatum fuisse a Deo, nisi quod ejus mandate unctus fuerat in
Regem .” — Lat.
195 “Though I walk — an Hebraism for though I am. ” — Cresswell.
196 “Parfera en moy son oeuvre .” —  Fr. “Will perform in me his work. ”
126John Calvin Comm on Psalms (V5)
be attached to David’s words, and it is enough to conclude, that he here repeats the same sentiment
formerly expressed, that God though highly exalted, takes notice of what might be thought to escape
his observation. Thus we have seen, ( Psalm 113:6 ,)
“The Lord dwelleth on high, yet he humbleth himself to behold both the things that are in heaven
and on earth.”
The meaning is, that though God’s glory is far above all heavens, the distance at which he is
placed does not prevent his governing the world by his providence. God is highly exalted, but he
sees after off, so that he needs not change place when he would condescend to take care of us. We
on our part are poor and lowly, but our wretched condition is; no reason why God will not concern
himself about us. While we view with admiration the immensity of his glory as raised above all
heavens, we must not disbelieve his willingness to foster us under his fatherly care. The two things
are, with great propriety, conjoined here by David, that, on the one hand, when we think of God’s
majesty we should not be terrified into a forgetfulness of his goodness and benignity, nor, on the
other, lose our reverence for his majesty in contemplating the condescension of his mercy. 197
7.Should I walk in the midst of trouble, etc. Here David declares the sense in which he looked
flint God would act the part of his preserver — by giving him life from the dead, were that necessary.
The passage is well deserving our attention for by nature we are so delicately averse to suffering
as to wish that we might all live safely beyond shot of its arrows, and shrink from close contact
with the fear of death, as something altogether intolerable. On the slightest approach of danger we
are immoderately afraid, as if our emergencies precluded the hope of Divine deliverance. This is
faith’s true office, to see life in the midst of death, and to trust the mercy of God — not as that
which will procure us universal exemption from evil, but as that which will quicken us in the midst
of death every moment of our lives; for God humbles his children under various trials, that his
defense of them may be the more remarkable, and that he may show himself to be their deliverer,
as well as their preserver. In the world believers are constantly exposed to enemies, and David
asserts, that he will be safe under God’s protection from all their machinations. He declares his
hope of life to lie in this, that the hand of God was stretched out for his help, that hand which he
knew to be invincible, and victorious over every foe. And from all this we are taught, that it is God’s
method to exercise his children with a continual conflict, that, having one foot as it were in the
grave, they may flee with alarm to hide themselves under his wings, where they malt abide in peace.
Some translate the particle   , aph, also, instead of anger,  reading —  thou wilt also extend over
mine; enemies, etc. But I have followed the more commonly received sense, as both fuller and more
natural.
8.Jehovah will recompense upon me, etc . The doubtfulness which attaches to the meaning of
the verb    , gamar, throws an uncertainty over the whole sentence. Sometimes it signifies to repay,
and, in general, to bestow, for it is often applied to free favors. 198 Yet the context would seem to
require.another sense, since, when it is added as a reason, that Jehovah’s mercy is everlasting, and
that he will not forsake the works of his hands,  the better sense would seem to be —  Jehovah will
perform for me, that is, will continue to show that he cares for my safety, and will fully perfect
what he has begun. Having once been delivered by an act of Divine mercy, he concludes that what
197 “Ne nons oste le goust de sa bonte, et benignite: d’autre part aussi afin que sa bonte par laquelle il daigne bien s’abbaisser
jusques a nons, ne diminue rien de la reverence que nous devons a sa gloire .” — Fr.
198 “Il signifie aucunefois Rendre, recompenser, et mesme generalement ottroyer ,” etc —  Fr.
127John Calvin Comm on Psalms (V5)
had been done would be perfected, as God’s nature is unchangeable, and he cannot divest himself
of that goodness which belongs to him. There can be no doubt that the way to maintain good hope
in danger is to fix our eyes upon the Divine goodness, on which our deliverance rests. God is under
no obligation on his part, but when, of his mere good pleasure, he promises to interest himself in
our behalf. David concludes with the best reason, from the eternity of the Divine goodness, that
the salvation granted him would be of no limited and merely evanescent character. This he confirms
still farther by what he adds, that it is impossible God should leave his work, as men may do, in an
imperfect or unfinished state through lassitude or disgust. This David is to be understood as asserting
in the same sense in which Paul declares, that “the gifts and calling of God are without repentance.”
(Romans 11:29 .) Men may leave off a work for very slight reasons which they foolishly undertook
from the first, and from which they may have been diverted through their inconstancy, or they may
be forced to give up through inability what they enterprised above their strength; but nothing of
this kind can happen with God, and, therefore, we have no occasion to apprehend that our hopes
will be disappointed in their course towards fulfillment. Nothing but sin and ingratitude on our part
interrupts the continued and unvarying tenor of the Divine goodness. What we firmly apprehend
by our faith God will never take from us, or allow to pass out of our hands. When he declares that
God perfects the salvation of his people, David would not encourage sloth, but strengthen his faith
and quicken himself to the exercise of prayer. What is the cause of that anxiety and fear which are
felt by the godly, but the consciousness of their own weakness and entire dependence upon God?
At the same time they rely with full certainty upon the grace of God, “being confident,” as Paul
writes to the Philippians,
“that he who has begun the good work will perform it till the day of Christ Jesus.” ( Philippians
1:6.)
The use to be made of the doctrine is, to remember, when we fall or are disposed to waver in
our minds, that since God has wrought the beginning of our salvation in us, he will carry it forward
to its termination. Accordingly, we should betake ourselves to prayer, that we may not, through
our own indolence, bar our access to that continuous stream of the divine goodness which flows
from a fountain that is inexhaustible.
128John Calvin Comm on Psalms (V5)
