---
layout: calvin-chapter
book_id: psalms
book_name: 诗篇
chapter: 142
total_chapters: 150
header-img: psalm-bg-mountain.jpg
date: 2026-04-30 20:08
---

PSALM 142
When Saul came into the cave where David lay concealed, this saint of God might upon such
an occurrence have been either thrown into consternation, or led by his alarm into some
unwarrantable step, it being common for persons in despair either to be prostrated with dismay, or
driven into frenzy. But it appears from this Psalm that David retained his composure, relying with
assured confidence upon God, and resigning himself to vows and prayers instead of taking any
unauthorized steps.
A Prayer of David, giving instruction when he was in the cave. 244
Psalm 142:1-4
1. I cried to Jehovah with my voice, with my voice to Jehovah I made supplication. 2. I pour
out my meditation before his face: I tell my affliction before his face. 3. When my spirit was
perplexed within me, and thou knewest my path: in the way wherein I walked they laid a snare
for me. 4. On looking to the right hand, and perceiving, none would know me, refuge failed me,
there was none seeking after my soul.
 
1.I cried 245 to Jehovah , etc. It showed singular presence of mind in David that he was not
paralyzed with fear, or that he did not in a paroxysm of fury take vengeance upon his enemy, as he
easily might have done; and that he was not actuated by despair to take away his life, but composedly
addressed himself to the exercise of prayer. There was good reason why the title should have been
affixed to the Psalm to note this circumstance, and David had good grounds for mentioning how
he commended himself to God. Surrounded by the army of Saul, and hemmed in by destruction on
every side, how was it possible for him to have spared so implacable an enemy, had he not been
fortified against the strongest temptations by prayer? The repetition he makes use of indicates his
having prayed with earnestness, so as to be impervious to every assault of temptation.
He tells us still more clearly in the next verse that he disburdened his ears unto God. To pour
out one’s thoughts and tell over his afflictions implies the reverse of those perplexing anxieties
which men brood over inwardly to their own distress, and by which they torture themselves, and
are chafed by their afflictions rather than led to God; or it implies the reverse of those frantic
exclamations to which others give utterance who find no comfort in the superintending providence
and care of God. In short, we are left to infer that while he did not give way before men to loud
and senseless lamentations, neither did he suffer himself to be tormented with inward and suppressed
cares, but made known his grief’s with unsuspecting confidence to the Lord.
3.When, my spirit , etc. Though he owns here that he felt anxiety, yet he confirms what he had
said as to the constancy of his faith. The figure which he uses of his spirit being perplexed , 246 aptly
244 In the history of David we read particularly of the two caves in which he took shelter, that of Adullam, ( 1 Samuel 22:1 ,)
and that of En-gedi, ( 1 Samuel 24:3 .) The latter is generally supposed to be the cave here
245 In the Hebrew the verb is in the future — “I will cry;” but as that language has no present tense, it frequently uses for it the
past and future promiscuously. Bishop Horne, therefore, renders in the present all the verbs in this Psalm, which Calvin translates
in the past, except the verbs in the two first verses, which he renders in the future. Translators, however, in general concur with
Calvin, and we think justly, the Psalm, as we conceive, being a recollection of the substance of the prayers he addressed to God
while in the cave of En-gedi, but which it cannot be supposed he had then an opportunity of committing to writing.
246 “Or c’est une belle similitude quand il dit que son esprit a este en tortille et enveloppe ,” etc. — Fr.
152John Calvin Comm on Psalms (V5)
represents the state of the mind in alternating between various resolutions when there was no
apparent outgate from danger, and increasing its distress by resorting to all kinds of devices. He
adds, that though there was no apparent way of safety, God knew from the beginning in what way
his deliverance should be effected. Others put a different meaning upon this clause, thou knowest
my way,  as if David asserted God to have been witness of his integrity, but the other is the more
correct, that God knew the way to deliver him, while his own mind was distracted by a variety of
thoughts, and yet could not conceive any mode of extrication. The words teach us, when we have
tried every remedy and know not what to do, to rest satisfied with the conviction that God is
acquainted with our afflictions, and condescends to care for us, as Abraham said —
“The Lord will provide.” ( Genesis 22:8 .)
4.On looking to the right hand , 247etc., He shows that there was good cause for the dreadful
sufferings he experienced, since no human aid or comfort was to be expected, and destruction
seemed inevitable. When he speaks of having looked and yet not perceived a friend amongst men,
he does not mean that he had turned his thoughts to earthly helps in forgetfulness of God, but that
he had made such inquiry as was warrantable after one on the earth who might assist him. Had any
person of the kind presented himself, he would no doubt have recognized him as an instrument in
the hand of God’s mercy, but it was God’s purpose that he should be abandoned of all assistance
from man, and that his deliverance from destruction should thus appear more extraordinary. In the
expression, none seeking after my soul , the verb to seek after  is used in a good sense, for being
solicitous about any man’s welfare or safety.
Psalm 142:5-7
5. I cried unto thee, O Jehovah! I said thou art my hope and my portion in the land of the living.
6. Attend unto my cry, for I labor very much under affliction: deliver me from my persecutors,
for they are stronger than I. 7. Rescue my soul from prison, that I may praise thy name; the righteous
shall crown me, for thou wilt recompense me.
 
5.I cried unto thee, O Jehovah ! With a view to hasten God’s interposition, David complains
of the low estate he was reduced to, and of his extremity; the term cry denoting vehemence, as I
have elsewhere noticed. He speaks of deliverance as being plainly needed, since he was now held
a prisoner. By prison  some suppose he alludes to the cave where he was lodged, but this is too
restricted a meaning. The subsequent clause, the righteous shall compass me , is translated differently
by some, they shall wait me . I have retained the true and natural sense. I grant that it is taken
figuratively for surrounding, intimating that he would be a spectacle to all, the eyes of men being
attracted by such a singular case of deliverance. If any consider the words not to be figurative, the
sense will be, That the righteous would not only congratulate him, but place a crown upon his head
in token of victory. Some explain the passage, They will assemble to congratulate me, and will
247 The allusion here, it is supposed, is to the observances of the ancient Jewish courts of judicature, in which the advocate, as
well as the accuser, stood on the right hand  of the accused. ( Psalm 109:5 .) The Psalmist felt himself in the condition of one who
had nobody to plead his cause, and to protect him in the dangerous circumstances in which he was placed.
153John Calvin Comm on Psalms (V5)
stand round me on every side like a crown. As the words literally read, they will crown  upon me,
some supply another pronoun, and give this sense, that the righteous would construe the mercy
bestowed upon David as a glory conferred upon themselves; for when God delivers any of his
children he holds out the prospect of deliverance to the rest, and, as it were, gifts them with a crown.
The sense which I have adopted is the simplest, however, That the mercy vouchsafed would be
shown conspicuously to all as in a theater, proving a signal example to the righteous for establishment
of their faith. The verb    , gamal , in the Hebrew, is of a more general signification than to repay,
and means to confer a benefit , as I have shown elsewhere.
154John Calvin Comm on Psalms (V5)
