---
layout: calvin-chapter
book_id: psalms
book_name: 诗篇
chapter: 145
total_chapters: 150
header-img: psalm-bg-mountain.jpg
date: 2026-04-30 20:08
---

PSALM 145
The Psalmist is led to celebrate the praises of God by reflecting upon his excellent wisdom,
goodness, and righteousness, both in the government of the world generally, and particularly in
managing, superintending, and defending the children of men. After recounting in general the
praises of his providence, he comes to speak of the special favor shown by him to his own people.
The Praise of David 275
Psalm 145:1-6
1. I will extol thee, my God and my king! 276 and I will bless thy name for ever and ever. 2.
Daily I will bless thee, and will praise thy name for ever and ever. 2773. Great is Jehovah, and
greatly to be praised, and there is no searching out, his greatness. 4. Generation to generation, will
praise thy works, and will show forth thy power. 5. I will meditate upon 278 the beauty of the glory
of thy excellency, and the words of thy wonderful things. 6. And they shall speak of the might of
thy terrible works, and I will declare thy greatness.
 
1.I will extol thee, my God and my king . David does not so much tell what he would do himself,
as stir up and urge all others to this religious service of offering to God the praises due to his name.
The design with which he declares God to be beneficent to the children of men is, to induce them
to cultivate a pious gratitude, he insists upon the necessity of persevering in the exercise; for since
God is constant in extending mercies, it would be highly improper in us to faint in his praises. As
he thus gives his people new ground for praising him, so he stimulates them to gratitude, and to
exercise it throughout the whole course of their life. In using the term daily , he denotes perseverance
in the exercise. Afterwards he adds, that should he live through a succession of ages he would never
cease to act in this manner. The repetitions used tend very considerably to give emphasis to his
language. As it is probable that the Psalm was written at a time when the kingdom of David was
in a flourishing condition, the circumstances deserves notice, that in calling God his king  he gives
both himself and other earthly princes their proper place, and does not allow any earthly distinctions
to interfere with the glory due to God.
This is made still more manifest in the verse which follows, where, in speaking of the greatness
of God as unmeasurable, he intimates that we only praise God aright when we are filled and
275 This Psalm is with much propriety entitled “Praise of David;” for it is throughout a continued celebration of the perfections
and doings of God. It is certainly one of the most interesting and beautiful of the compositions of the sweet singer of Israel; and
so high an opinion did the ancient Hebrews form of it that they were wont to say — “Whoever utters this Psalm thrice each day
with the heart and tongue is a happy man, and shall infallibly enjoy the blessings of the world to come.” The time and occasion
of its composition can only be conjectured. Dr. Morison thinks it probable that it was composed by David when he and the nation
of Israel obtained the blessings which he implored in the preceding Psalm; and that it is that new song which he purposed to
sing ( Psalm 144:9 ) when God appeared in glory for his chosen people. This is the last of the alphabetical Psalms. The first verse
commences with the first letter of the Hebrew alphabet, the second verse with the second letter, and so on to the close, with the
exception that the hemistich of which  , nun, was the commencing letter is wanting. The other alphabetical Psalms are Psalm
25, Psalm 34 , Psalm 37 , Psalm 111 , Psalm 112 , Psalm 119 .
276 The Jewish government was a theocracy .
277 “In seculum et usque .” — Lat. The original Hebrew words are           , leolam vaad , which Dr. Adam Clarke had translated
“for ever and onward  in this and the coming world.” “These sorts of expressions,” he adds, “are very difficult to be translated.”
278 “Ou, parleray .” — Fr.marg . “Or, will speak of.”
169John Calvin Comm on Psalms (V5)
overwhelmed with an ecstatic admiration of the immensity of his power. This admiration will form
the fountain from which our just praises of him will proceed, according the measure of our capacity.
4.Generation to generation , etc. Here he insists upon the general truth, that all men were made
and are preserved in life for this end, that they may devote themselves to the praise of God. And
there is an implied contrast between the eternal name of God, and that immortality of renown which
great men seem to acquire by their exploits. Human excellencies are eulogized in histories; with
God it stands differently, for there is not a day in which he does not. renew remembrance of his
works, and cherish it by some present effect, so as indelibly to preserve it alive upon our minds.
For the same reason he speaks of the glorious brightness , or beauty of his excellence, the better to
raise in others a due admiration of it. By the words of his wonderful works, I consider that there is
an allusion to the incomprehensible method of God’s works, for so many are the wonders that they
overwhelm our senses. And we may infer from this, that the greatness of God is not that which lies
concealed in his mysterious essence, and in subtle disputation upon which, to the neglect of his
works, many have been chargeable with mere trifling, for true religion demands practical not
speculative knowledge. Having said that he would speak of , or meditate upon God’s works , (for
the Hebrew word,      , asichah , as we have elsewhere seen, may be rendered either way,) he transfers
his discourse to others, intimating, that there will always be some in the world to declare the
righteousness, goodness, and wisdom of God, and that his divine excellencies are worthy of being
sounded, with universal consent, by every tongue. And, should others desist and defraud God of
the honor due to him, he declares that he would himself at least discharge his part, and, while they
were silent, energetically set forth the praises of God. Some think, that the might of his terrible
works  is an expression to the same effect with what had been already stated. But it seems rather to
denote the judgments of God against profane scoffers.
Psalm 145:7-13
7. They shall steak forth [or, utter copiously] the memory of the greatness of thy goodness,
and shall sing of thy righteousness. 8. Jehovah is gracious and compassionate, slow to anger, and
great in mercy. 9. Jehovah is good to all, and his mercies above all his works. 10. All thy works
shall praise thee, O Jehovah! and thy merciful ones shall bless thee. 11. They shall speak the glory
of thy kingdom, and shall talk of thy power. 12. That they may make known his powers to the
sons of men, and the glory of the beauty of his kingdom. 13. Thy kingdom is a kingdom of all
ages, and thy dominion unto all successive generations. 279
279 After this verse two lines appear to have been lost in the Hebrew text. The Psalm, as we have said before, is alphabetical;
and each stanza begins with a letter of the Hebrew alphabet in regular order, till we come to Psalm 145:14 , when a break — the
only one in the Psalm — takes place. Psalm 145:13  begins with the letter  , mem , and Psalm 145:14  with the letter  , samech .
Thus the stanza beginning with the letter,  , nun, is wanting. It is thus supplied in the Septuagint: Πιστὸς Κύριος ἐν πᾶσι τοῖς
λόγοις αὐτοῦ καὶ ὅσιος ἐν πᾶσι τοῖς ἔργοις αὐτοῦ . “Faithful is Jehovah in all his words, and holy in all his works.” Dr. Adam
Clarke, after observing that there is not a verse answering to  , nun, in any of the printed copies of the Hebrew Bible, states, that
there is one MS., now in Trinity College, Dublin, which has it thus (he supposes by correction) at the bottom of the page:
                                    
Neeman Yehovah be-cal debaraiv; ve-chasid be-cal maasaiv.
170John Calvin Comm on Psalms (V5)
 
7.They shall speak forth , etc. As the verb    , nabang , means properly to gush out , some suppose,
that, as applied to speech, it means not simply speaking, but an overflowing utterance, like water
rushing from a fountain, and the verb      , yerannenu , in the close of the verse, answers to this,
meaning to shout , or sing aloud . To celebrate the memory of the Lord’s goodness, is the same with
recalling to memory what we have personally experienced of his goodness. We cannot deny God’s
claim to praise in all his excellencies, but we are most sensibly affected by such proofs of his
fatherly mercy as we have ourselves experienced. David makes use, therefore, of this alluring
consideration to induce us the more readily and cheerfully to engage in the praises of God, or rather,
(according to the figurative word already used,) to burst forth in celebration of them.
8.Jehovah is gracious , etc. He opens up the goodness of which he spoke by using several
expressions, as that God is inclined to mercy, (for such is the proper meaning of the word     ,
channun ,) and that he helps us willingly, as one sympathizing with our miseries. It is to be noticed
that David has borrowed the terms which he here applies to God from that celebrated passage in
Exodus 34:6 ; and as the inspired writers drew their doctrine from the fountain of the law, we need
not wonder that they set a high value upon the vision which is there recorded, and in which as clear
and satisfactory a description of the nature of God is given us as can anywhere be found. David,
therefore, in giving us a brief statement of what it was most important we should know in reference
to God, makes use of the same terms employed there. Indeed no small part of the grace of God is
to be seen in his alluring us to himself by such attractive titles. Were he to bring his power
prominently into view before us, we would be cast down by the terror of it rather than encouraged,
as the Papists represent him a dreadful God, from whose presence all must fly, whereas the proper
view of him is that which invites us to seek after him. Accordingly, the more nearly that a person
feels himself drawn to God, the more has he advanced in the knowledge of him. If it be true that
God is not only willing to befriend us, but is spoken of as touched with sympathy for our miseries,
so as to be all the kinder to us the more that we are miserable, what folly were it not to fly to him
without delay? But as we drive God’s goodness away from us by our sins, and block up the way
of access, unless his goodness overcome this obstacle, it would be in vain that the Prophets spoke
of his grace and mercy. 280 It was necessary, therefore, to add what follows, that great is his mercy,
that he pardons sins, and bears with the wickedness of men, so as to show favor to the unworthy.
As regards the ungodly, although God shows them his long-suffering patience, they are incapable
of perceiving pardon, so that the doctrine on which we insist has a special application to believers
only, who apprehend God’s goodness by a living faith. To the wicked it is said —
“To what end is the day of the Lord for you? the day of the Lord is darkness and not light,
affliction and not joy.”
(Amos 5:18 .)
We see in what severe terms Nahum threatens them at the very beginning of his prophecy.
Having referred to the language used in the passage from Moses, he adds immediately, on the other
hand, to prevent them being emboldened by it, that God is a rigid and severe, a terrible and an
This exactly corresponds with the reading in the Septuagint. “Nothing,” says Dr. Lowth in Merrick’s Annotations on the
Psalms, “can be more certain than the genuineness of the verse   which the Septuagint has preserved, varying only in two words
from Psalm 145:17 .”
280 “Si la bonte de Dieu ne surmonte cest empeschement, c’est en vain que les Prophetes traitteroyent de sa grace et misericorde .”
— Fr.
171John Calvin Comm on Psalms (V5)
inexorable judge. ( Nahum 1:3 .) They therefore who have provoked God to anger by their sins, must
see to secure his favor by believing.
9.Jehovah is good to all , etc. The truth here stated is of wider application than the former, for
the declaration of David is to the effect, that not only does God, with fatherly indulgence and
clemency, forgive sin, but is good to all without discrimination, as he makes his sun to rise upon
the good and upon the wicked. ( Matthew 5:45 .) Forgiveness of sin is a treasure from which the
wicked are excluded, but their sin and depravity does not prevent God from showering down his
goodness upon them, which they appropriate without being at all sensible of it. Meanwhile believers,
and they only, know what it is to enjoy a reconciled God, as elsewhere it is said —
“Come ye to him, and be ye enlightened, and your faces shall not be ashamed; taste and see
that the Lord is good.”
(Psalm 34:5, 8 .)
When it is added that the mercy of God extends to all his works , this ought not to be considered
as contrary to reason, or obscure. Our sins having involved the whole world in the curse of God,
there is everywhere an opportunity for the exercise of God’s mercy, even in helping the brute
creation.
10.All thy works , etc. Though many would suppress God’s praises, observing a wicked silence
regarding them, David declares that they shine forth everywhere, appear of themselves, and are
sounded, as it were, by the very dumb creatures. He then assigns the special work of declaring them
to believers, who have eyes to perceive God’s works, and know that they cannot be employed better
than in celebrating his mercies. What is added — they shall speak the glory of thy kingdom  — I
consider to have reference only to believers. If any incline to think that these words rather apply
to God’s creatures universally, I would not object to that view. But the particular kind of speaking
or teaching which David here refers to, applies only to saints. Accordingly I have retained the future
tense of the verbs, rather than the optative mood, as others have done. In using the term kingdom,
David intimates that this is the tendency of the manifestation of God’s works, to reduce the whole
world to a state of order, and subject it to his government. He insists upon the excellency of this
kingdom, that men may know that things are to be considered as in disorder and confusion, unless
God alone be acknowledged supreme. He denies it to be transitory, like all earthly kingdoms,
asserting that it will stand fast for ever. And to call our attention more particularly to its everlasting
nature, he breaks out into an admiring exclamation, and addresses his discourse to God.
Psalm 145:14-16
14. Jehovah upholding all the falling, 281 and raising up all who are bowed down. 15. The eyes
of all hope in thee, and thou givest them their food in its season. 16. Thou openest thine hand, and
satisfiest every living thing by thy good pleasure.
 
281 “     nophelim , the falling , or those who are not able to keep their feet — the weak. He shores them up — he is their prop .
No man falls through his own weakness  merely ; if he rely on God, the strongest foe cannot shake him.” — Dr. Adam Clarke
172John Calvin Comm on Psalms (V5)
14.Jehovah upholding all the falling . He gives instances of the goodness and mercy of God,
such as make it evident that God reigns only for the promotion of the general welfare of mankind.
By the falling , and those who are bowed down , he means figuratively those who are overwhelmed
by adversity, and would sink at once, were not God to extend his hand for their support. God, in
short, has respect to the troubles of men, and helps such as are in distress, so that all ought not only
to look upon his divine government with reverence, but willingly and cordially submit themselves
to it. Another lesson taught us is, that none will be disappointed who seeks comfort from God in
his affliction.
15.The eyes of all hope in thee . David adduces an additional proof of God’s goodness, in giving
food to all living creatures, and thus showing himself in the character of the father of a family.
Some interpreters, led by the term hope, which is employed, restrict the application to men, as being
endued with reason and intelligence, to seek their food from their heavenly father, while the beasts
seek it only in a gross manner, by sight or smell. But although not endued with the exercise of
reason, leading them to depend upon God’s providence, necessity itself forces even them, by a
certain hidden instinct, to seek their food, so that they may very properly be said to hope in God,
as elsewhere the young ravens are said to cry unto him. ( Psalm 147:9 .) Besides, those who would
restrict the words to man, still leave them open to the charge of impropriety; for the wicked have
no regard to the fatherly care of God, more than the ox or the ass. Since such is the order established
in nature that all animals are brought to a dependence upon their Maker, there is no impropriety in
supposing the affection of desire or expectation to be here put for the fact of dependence itself. 282
All ambiguity is taken away by the next verse, where every living thing is said to be satisfied. It is
said that he gives them their food, and in its season, for the very variety of it serves more to illustrate
the providence of God. Each has its own way of feeding, and the different kinds of aliment are
designed and adapted for different uses. David therefore speaks of that food which is particular to
them. The pronoun is not in the plural, and we are not to read in their season , as if it applied to the
animals. The food he notices as given in its season; for here also we are to notice the admirable
arrangements of divine providence, that there is a certain time appointed for harvest, vintage, and
hay crop, and that the year is so divided into intervals, that the cattle are fed at one time upon grass,
at another on hay, or straw, or acorns, or other products of the earth. Were the whole supply poured
forth at one and the same moment, it could not be gathered together so conveniently; and we have
no small reason to admire the seasonableness with which the different kinds of fruit and aliment
are yearly produced.
16.Thou openest thine hand , etc. The figure is a beautiful one. Most men pass over without
observation the singular goodness of God apparent in this admirable ordering of things in nature,
and David therefore represents him as stretching out his hand to distribute to the animals their food.
We sinfully confine our attention to the earth which yields us our food, or to natural causes. To
correct this error David describes God as opening his hands to put the food into our mouths. The
word     , ratson , some render desire , as though he meant that God supplied each kind of animal
with food according to its wish. And a little afterwards we do indeed find it used in that sense.
Others, however, refer it rather to God’s feeding them of his mere good pleasure and kindness; it
not being enough to say that our food is given us by God, unless we add, as in the second clause
of the verse, that his kindness is gratuitous, and that there is no extrinsic cause whatever moving
282 “Il ne sera point mal connenable que l’affection soit yei mise pour la chose mesme .” — Fr.
173John Calvin Comm on Psalms (V5)
him to provide so liberally for every living creature. In that case the cause is put for the effect; the
various kinds of provision being effects of his good pleasure — χαρισματα της χάριτος . If it be
found that men and others of his creatures often suffer and die from want, this is to be traced to the
change which has come upon nature by sin. The fair order which subsisted in it by God’s original
appointment often fails since the fall through our sins, and yet in what remains of it, though marred,
we may see the kindness of God referred to by David, for in the severest failures of crop, there is
no year so barren and unproductive, that God may not be said to open his hand in it.
Psalm 145:17-21
17. Jehovah is righteous in all his ways, and merciful in all his works. 18. Jehovah is near to
all who call upon him, to all who call upon him in truth. 19. He will perform the desire of them
that fear him, and will hear their cry, and will save them. 20. Jehovah preserves all them that love
him, and will destroy all the wicked. 21. My mouth shall speak the praise of Jehovah, and all, flesh
shall bless his holy name for ever and ever.
 
17.Jehovah is righteous in all his ways . He does not now speak of God’s goodness merely in
providing all his creatures with their daily food, but comprehends other parts of his providence, as
in correcting men for their sins, restraining the wicked, trying the patience of his people under the
cross, and governing the world by judgments which are often inscrutable to us. The ground upon
which praise is here ascribed to God may seem a common one, being in every one’s mouth; but in
nothing is wisdom shown more than in holding fast the truth, that God is just in all his ways, so as
to retain in our hearts an unabated sense of it amidst all troubles and confusions. Though all
acknowledge God to be just, most men are no sooner overtaken by affliction than they quarrel with
his severity: unless their wishes are immediately complied with, they are impatient, and nothing is
more common than to hear his justice impeached. As it is everywhere abused by the wicked
imputations men cast upon it, here it is very properly vindicated from such ungrateful treatment,
and asserted to be constant and unfailing, however loudly the word may disparage it. It is expressly
added, in all his ways and works,  for we fail to give God due honor unless we recognize a consistent
tenor of righteousness in the whole progress of his operation. Nothing is more difficult in the time
of trouble, when God has apparently forsaken us, or afflicts us without cause, than to restrain our
corrupt feelings from breaking out against his judgments; as we are told of the emperor Mauricius
in a memorable passage of history, that seeing his sons murdered by the wicked and perfidious
traitor Phocas, and being about to be carried out himself to death, he cried out — “Thou art righteous,
O God, and just are thy judgments!” As this man of no bad character opposed such a shield to the
cruel trials he met with, we must learn to put a check upon our spirits, and always give God’s
righteousness the honor due to it. David, however, goes farther still, intimating that God, even when
he seems to be most severe, is so far from being cruel as to temper his heaviest judgments with
equity and clemency.
18.Jehovah is near to all that call upon him . This truth is principally applicable to believers,
whom God in the way of singular privilege invites to draw near him, promising that he will be
favorable to their prayers. Faith, there is no doubt, lies idle and even dead without prayer, in which
174John Calvin Comm on Psalms (V5)
the spirit of adoption shows and exercises itself, and by which we evidence that all his promises
are considered by us as stable and sure. The inestimable grace of God, in short, towards believers,
appears in this, that he exhibits himself to them as a Father. As many doubts steal upon us when
we pray to God, and we either approach him with trembling, or fail by becoming discouraged and
lifeless, David declares it to be true without exception, that God hears all who call upon him. At
the same time, as most men pervert and profane the method of calling upon God through inventions
of their own, the right manner of praying is laid down in the next part of the verse, which is, that
we should pray in truth. Although men resort to God in a cold manner, or even in their prayers
expostulate with him, while their hearts are swelling with pride or with anger, they yet complain
that they are not heard; just as if there were no difference between praying and quarreling, or the
exercise of faith and hypocrisy. The greater part of men, involved in infidelity, scarcely believe
that there is a God in heaven at all; others would banish him from it if they could; others would tie
him down to their views and, wishes, while some seek slight and insufficient ways of reconciling
him, so that the common way of praying is but an idle and empty ceremony. 283 And although nearly
all men without exception have recourse to God in the time of their need, they are few indeed who
bring the smallest measure of faith or repentance. It were better that the name of God should be
buried in oblivion than exposed to such insults. There is good reason, therefore, why truth should
be said to be necessary in our prayers — that they come from a sincere heart. The falsehood, which
is the opposite of this sincerity, is of various kinds; indeed it were difficult to enumerate them —
infidelity, wavering, impatience, murmuring, pretended humility, in short there are as many sorts
of it as there are sinful dispositions. The truth being one of no small importance, David again
confirms and enlarges upon it in the next verse. The repetition is worthy of our particular notice,
for such is our tendency to unbelief, that there are few who in calling upon God do not look upon
their prayers as fruitless. Hence the perverse manner in which the wandering minds of men are
tossed hither and thither, as in the Papacy they invented patrons without number, holding it of no
importance almost to embrace with an unwavering faith the promises by which God invites us to
himself.
To throw the door still more open, the Holy Spirit, by the mouth of David, tells us, that God
will accommodate himself to the desires of all who fear him. This is a mode of expression of which
it is difficult to say how much it ought to impress our minds. Who is man, that God should show
complaisance to his will, when rather it is ours to look up to his exalted greatness, and humbly
submit to his authority? Yet he voluntarily condescends to these terms, to obtemper our desires.
At the same time, there is a check to be put upon this liberty, and we have not a license of universal
appetency, as if his people might forwardly clamor for whatever their corrupt desires listed, but
before God says that he will hear their prayers, he enjoins the law of moderation and submission
upon their affections, as we learn from John, —
“We know that he will deny us nothing,
if we seek it according to his will.” ( 1 John 5:14 .)
For the same reason, Christ dictated that form of prayer, “Thy will be done,” setting limits
round us, that we should not preposterously prefer our desires to those of God, nor ask without
deliberation what first comes into our mouth. David, in making express mention of them that fear
283 “Les autres voudroyent qu’il fust sujet a eux: les autres comme par maniere d’acquit cerchent cluelque moyen de l’appaiser ,”
etc. — Fr.
175John Calvin Comm on Psalms (V5)
God,  enjoins fear, reverence, and obedience upon them before holding out the favorable indulgence
of God, that they might not think themselves warranted to ask more than his word grants and
approves. When he speaks of their cry, this is a kind of qualification of what he had said. For God’s
willingness to grant our prayers is not always so apparent that he answers them at the very moment
they are made. We have, therefore, need of perseverance in this trial of our faith, and our desires
must be confirmed by crying. The last clause — he will save them  — is also added by way of
correction, to make us aware how far, and for what end God answers the prayers of his people,
namely, to evidence in a practical manner that he is the faithful guardian of their welfare.
20.Jehovah preserves , etc. He insists upon the same truth, — that God is near to his people to
help them in the time of need; this being a sure proof of his presence, that by his mercy they come
safe and unhurt out of every danger which befalls them. It is worthy of our notice, that, instead of
fear, he now speaks of love; for, in distinguishing believers by this title, that they love God , he
intimates it to be the root of true godliness, that they submit themselves to him voluntarily, which
again is the effect of faith. Till God draw us by the attractions of his grace, this placid submission
will never follow. The love spoken of by David, however, is perhaps more extensive, as God’s
people not only attach themselves to him in the way of obedience to his authority, but knowing
that union to him is of all other things most desirable, aspire with their whole soul after this
happiness. Still there can be no doubt, that the reference is to it here as the chief part of holiness
and righteousness, as was said by Moses,
“And now, O Israel, what does the Lord thy God require of thee,” etc. ( Deuteronomy 10:12 .)
This effect of godliness in securing our safety and preservation under the divine guardianship,
David exemplifies by an opposition clause, declaring, that all the wicked shall, in the just judgment
of God, miserably perish. That he might close as he had begun, he again affirms, that he will publish
the praises of God , and urges all to the same duty by his example. Some would read,  every living
thing shall bless , but this does not seem to me a proper reading. When Moses, speaking of the flood,
says, that “all flesh  in which was the breath of life perished,” I grant that the term comprehends the
brute creation, but wherever “flesh” is mentioned without any addition, the reference is only to
men. Nor is David here stating what they would, but what they should do, declaring all men bound
by the great and inexhaustible goodness of God constantly and for ever to praise him.
176John Calvin Comm on Psalms (V5)
