---
layout: calvin-chapter
book_id: psalms
book_name: 诗篇
chapter: 69
total_chapters: 150
header-img: psalm-bg-mountain.jpg
date: 2026-04-30 20:07
---

PSALM 69
There is a close resemblance between this psalm and the twenty-second. In the opening verses,
David complains of the barbarous cruelty of his enemies, and of the grievous wrongs which they
had inflicted upon him. 63 But his mind, he affirms, was not hereby reduced to such a state of distress
as to prevent him from patiently relying on the protection of God, or to discourage him from
continuing in the undeviating course of a holy and an upright life. He rather testifies that his piety,
and the courage and activity which he had manifested in maintaining the interests of the divine
glory, were the cause of the hostility borne to him by the generality of men. After having again
complained of being not less shamefully than cruelly oppressed by his enemies, he invokes God
to visit them with deserved punishment. In the close, exulting as if he had obtained his highest
wishes, he engages to yield to God a solemn sacrifice of praise.
To the chief musician upon Shoshannim of David.
We have already spoken elsewhere of the word Shoshannim. Its proper meaning is uncertain
and obscure; but the most probable conjecture is, that it was the commencement of some song. If,
however, any would prefer considering it as the name of some musical instrument, I have no
objections. But the opinion held by some that this psalm was composed at the season of spring,
when the lilies begin to blossom, is altogether unfounded and frivolous. 64 Before proceeding farther,
we would have you to observe that David wrote this inspired ode not so much in his own name, as
in the name of the whole Church, of whose Head he was an eminent type, as will be more dearly
brought out in the sequel. This is highly worthy of our notice, that from this consideration we may
be led to contemplate with the greater attention the representation which is here given of the common
condition of all the people of God. Besides, it is highly probable that David did not here comprehend
only one kind of persecution, but all the evils which he had suffered during the course of many
years.
Psalm 69:1-5
1. Save me, O God! for the waters have entered in unto my soul. 2. I am sunk in deep mire,
where there is no footing, [or standing place:] I am come into deep waters, and the flood 65 of the
water overfloweth me. 3. I am weary of crying; my throat has become hoarse therewith: my eyes
have failed with [or in] waiting for my God. 4. They who hate me without cause are more in number
than the hairs of my head: my lying adversaries, who eagerly desire to destroy me, are increased;
63 The particular enemies of whom he speaks are uncertain; some referring the occasion of the composition of the psalm to
his persecution by Saul, and others to the rebellion of Absalom. But to whatever part of David’s eventful life the psalm primarily
refers, it may be concluded, from the frequency with which it is quoted and applied to Christ in the New Testament, that it was
prophetic of him, of whom David, rejected and persecuted, was an eminent type. It is quoted in the New Testament at least seven
times; the 4th verse in John 15:25 ; the 9th verse in John 2:17 , and Romans 15:3 ; the 21st verse in Matthew 27:34, 48 , and John
19:28, 29 ; the 22d and 23d verses in Romans 11:9, 10 ; and the 25th verse in Acts 1:16, 20 .
64 They rest this opinion upon the meaning which they attach to the word      , Shoshannim , in the title of the psalm, which
they translate lilies
65 “Ou, la force et le fil .” — Fr. marg . “Or, the force and course.”
28John Calvin Comm on Psalms (V3)
66 that which I took not by spoil, then 67 I restored it. 5. O God! thou knowest my foolishness; and
my faults are not hidden from thee.
 
1. Save me, O God! for the waters, etc. Under the figure of waters, the Psalmist represents his
condition as so extremely distressing that it brought him even to the brink of despair; and yet we
know that, so far from being a soft and an effeminate person, he was one who encountered and
overcame dreadful temptations with extraordinary courage. Whence we may infer the bitterness of
the distress with which he was at that time afflicted. Some understand the word soul as denoting
life;68 but this gives a very cold and unsatisfactory meaning. It rather signifies the heart. A man
when he falls into an abyss of waters, may prevent for some time the water from entering his body,
by stopping his mouth and his nostrils, but at length, from its being impossible for a human being
to live without respiration, suffocation will compel him to let in the waters, and they will penetrate
even to the heart. David by this metaphor would intimate, not only that the waters had covered and
overwhelmed him, but also that he had been forced to draw them into his body.
2. I am sunk in deep mire, where there is no standing place  Here he compares his afflictions to
a deep sink of mire, where there is still greater danger; for if a man fixes his feet upon a solid
bottom, he may raise himself up, there having been many instances in which persons, placing their
feet on the bottom, have by a sudden spring emerged and escaped the peril of the waters; but when
a man finds himself once sunk in some slough or muddy river, it is all over with him, he has no
means of saving himself. 69 The Psalmist adduces additional circumstances in illustration of his
afflicted condition. He declares that he was inundated by the flowing of the waters;  an expression
indicating the disorder and confusion which his distresses and persecutions produced.
3 I am weary of crying  David, in seeking and calling upon God, when his affairs were in such
a confused and desperate condition, exhibited an instance of rare and wonderful patience. He
complains of having continued crying until he was exhausted and became hoarse, and all to no
purpose. By the word weary, he does not mean that he gave up with prayer, as if he had cast from
him all love to and delight in that exercise upon finding that it proved unavailing as a means of
deliverance. He rather describes his untiring perseverance; and the same idea is expressed by his
hoarse throat  and failing eyes.70 He certainly did not cry out before men from mere affectation,
nor was this hoarseness contracted in the course of one day. We perceive, then, that although his
bodily senses failed him, the vigor of his faith was by no means extinguished. When we reflect that
David has spoken, as it were, out of the mouth of Christ, and, as it were, out of the mouth of all
true saints who are the members of Christ, we ought not to think that any strange thing happens to
us, if at any time we are so overwhelmed with death, as to be unable to discern the slightest hope
66 “Ou, fortifiez .” — Fr. marg . “Or, strengthened.”
67 The Hebrew word   , for then, appears to be emphatic. “   ; in ipso articulo , (Schultens inProverbs 7:22 ;) immediately,
without any contention, or delay.” Lowth, quoted in Merrick’s Annotations.
68 “The waters are come in unto my soul ; i.e., a flood of overwhelming calamities threaten my life: comp. verse 16.” —
Cresswell . Williams thinks the allusion is to a leaky vessel, or to an inundation.
69 “Comme nous en voyons plusieurs qui donnans du pied au fond, de roideur trouvent facon d’eschapper le peril de l’eau:
mais depuis qu’on se trouve une fois enfonce en quelque bourbier ou riviere limonneuse, c’est fait, il n’y a nul moyen de se
sauver .” — Fr.
70 “‘My sight  faileth me,’ etc. This is said metaphorically, the metaphor being taken from the pain occasioned to the eyes when
they are long and intently fixed upon the same point.” — Cresswell
29John Calvin Comm on Psalms (V3)
of life. Yea, rather let us learn betimes, while God spares us, to meditate on this truth, and derive
the aid which it is fitted to impart under calamity, that even in the most profound depths of adversity
faith may hold us up, and, what is more, may elevate us to God; there being, as Paul testifies,
(Romans 8:39 ) no height nor depth which can separate us from the infinite love of Him who swallows
up all depths, yea, even hell itself.
4.They who hate me without cause are more in number than the hairs of my head  The Psalmist
now expresses without figure what he had said under the metaphors of the mire and of the impetuous
rushing of the waters. Persecuted as he was by so great a multitude of enemies, he had too good
reason to be afraid of death in innumerable ways. Nor is his language hyperbolical, when he
represents his enemies as more in number than the hairs of his head, since he was mortally hated
and detested by the whole kingdom, it being the universal belief that he was a base and wicked
traitor to his country. Farther, we know from the sacred history how numerous and powerful the
armies were which Saul sent forth to pursue him. He expresses the mortal hatred which they bore
to him, when he tells us that they were intently set upon his destruction, being eagerly desirous to
have him cut off by a violent death; and yet he avows that he had done nothing to merit such
unrelenting persecution. The Hebrew word    , chinnam, which we have rendered, without cause,
and which some translate, for nothing, intimates that they were impelled by a strong desire to do
him injury, although he had not done them even the slightest wrong, nor given them the smallest
provocation by ill usage of any kind. For this reason he applies to his enemies the appellation    ,
sheker, that is, liars, because they had no just ground to make war upon him, although they pretended
the contrary. Let us, therefore, after his example, if at any time we are subjected to persecution,
study to have the support arising from the testimony of a good conscience, and to be able freely to
protest before God, that the hatred which our enemies cherish against us is altogether causeless.
This implies a self-control to which it is very difficult for a man to inure himself; but the more
difficult it is, the more strenuous ought to be his efforts to attain it. It is mere effeminacy to regard
it as an intolerable evil to be unrighteously afflicted; and the folly of this is very happily exposed
by that noble answer of Socrates to his wife, who, having one day lamented, in prison, that he was
condemned wrongfully, received from him this reply, “What then — would you rather that I should
have suffered death for my offenses?” Farther, David adds, that he not only had to suffer the wrongs
of violence, but had also to bear much reviling and contumely, as if he had been convicted of many
crimes; a trial which, to an ingenuous mind, is more bitter and hard to bear than a hundred deaths.
Many are to be found resolutely prepared to encounter death, who are by no means prepared to
exhibit equal fortitude in the endurance of shame. Farther, David was not only despoiled of his
goods by the violence of robbers, but he had been also mangled in his person, as if he had been a
thief and a robber: That which I took not by spoil, then I restored it71 When his enemies thus
plundered and maltreated him, they doubtless boasted that they were acting as the judges of a
71 “There is an apparent impropriety in the language of this verse, though the sense is perfectly clear. It is a proverbial
expression, to mark the injustice and extortion of the enemies that are referred to, who compelled the speaker, without any right,
to yield up his goods to persons to whom he was not indebted.” — Walford . Horsley observes, that this last clause is a proverbial
expression, the meaning of which is, “I have been accountable for the crimes of others.” Dr Adam Clarke also remarks, that this
is a sort of proverbial expression like these: “Those who suffered the wrong pay the costs” — “Kings sin and the people are
punished.” This pre-eminently applies to Christ, who was perfectly holy, but who, by bearing the punishment due to the guilt
of man, made satisfaction to Divine justice for sins which he never committed, and restored those blessings which he never took
away.
30John Calvin Comm on Psalms (V3)
perverse and wicked man; and we know that they were held in honorable estimation as judges. Let
us therefore learn from this example to prepare ourselves not only to bear patiently all losses and
troubles, yea, even death itself; but also shame and reproach, if at any time we are loaded with
unfounded accusations. Christ himself, the fountain of all righteousness and holiness, was not
exempted from foul calumny, why then should we be dismayed when we meet with a similar trial?
It may well fortify our minds against it when we consider, that to persevere steadfastly in the practice
of righteousness, although such is the reward which we receive from the world, is the genuine test
of our integrity.
5.O God! thou knowest my foolishness  Augustine has labored to little purpose to show in what
way these words are applicable to Christ; and at length he transfers to his members that which could
not properly be said of the Head. 72 David here uses the language of irony; and by this mode of
expressing himself he meant to intimate, that, overwhelmed with the unrighteous judgments of
men, he betakes himself to God, and implores him to appear as the defender of his cause. This is
much more emphatic than if he had affirmed plainly, and without figure, that his integrity was
known to God. In this way he administers a sharp rebuke to his enemies, and as it were looks down
with a noble contempt upon the calumnious speeches which they uttered against him; as Jeremiah
does when he says,
“O Lord! thou hast deceived me, and I was deceived.”
(Psalm 20:7 )
Some ignorant people put a violent construction on these words of Jeremiah, as if they implied
that he was actually deceived; whereas he is rather to be understood as deriding with bitter sarcasm
his calumniators, who, in speaking evil of him, were chargeable with reproaching and blaspheming
God himself. David in like manner, in the passage before us, as a means of preserving himself from
succumbing under the perverse judgments of men, appeals to God as the judge of his cause; and
72 According to Augustine, the Messiah, when he says “my foolishness” and “my iniquities,” speaks of the sins of men which
were imputed to him, and for which he suffered and died under the curse of the law, which treated him as if he had been a sinner,
in consequence of the sins thus imputed to him. A similar interpretation is given by Bishops Horsley and Horne, as well as many
others. “The Messiah,” says the first of these critics, “here, as in many places, may speak of the follies and crimes of men, for
which he had made himself answerable as his own.” Admitting, as we are disposed to do, although Calvin takes an opposite
view, that the passage is applicable to Christ, it may be doubted whether this is the correct interpretation. The sins of those for
whom Christ died, by being imputed to him, no doubt became his in the eye of the law, in such a sense as to make him answerable
for them. But the Scriptures, be it observed, while they speak of him as “wounded for our transgressions, and bruised for our
iniquities,” and as “bearing our sins in his own body on the tree,” as if afraid to use any forms of expression which would even
seem to derogate from his immaculate purity, never speak of the sins of those for whom he died as his own sins. What Horsley
adds, as an additional explanation, is very unguarded. “Perhaps,” says he, “He who, although he was without sin, was yet tempted
in all points like up to us, might, in his humility, speak of the incitement of the passions in his own mind as weakness and fault ,
making confession of it before the Father.” Nothing, doubtless, was farther from the mind of the prelate than to teach any thing
inconsistent with the perfect holiness of the Son of God; and he expressly warns that “he was without sin;” but the language
which he employs is scarcely consistent with this position, and it can convey no idea on the subject except an erroneous one.
“The prince of this world cometh,” said Jesus to his disciples, “and hath nothing in me” —  hath nothing in me , that is, to use
the words of Dr Doddridge, “no guilt of mine to give him power over me; nor any inward corruption, to take part with his
temptations.” The explanation of the text, which appears to be the most natural and consistent, is that which considers the Savior
as solemnly appealing to the Father in vindication of his innocence. His enemies falsely charged him with crimes, and made
these charges the ground of their cruel and malignant proceedings against him. The Divine Sufferer, therefore, with confidence
appeals to God, saying, Thou, who art the omniscient and all-righteous Judge, knowest that I am innocent of the crimes laid to
my charge, and I invoke thee to plead my cause. This interpretation, which is adopted by many eminent critics, as Dr Boothroyd,
Dr Morrison, Walford, and others, is strongly supported by the context. The preceding verse contains strong assertions of his
innocence; and it was very natural to accompany these with an appeal from the falsehood and calumny of men, to the all-seeing
and righteous Judge of the universe.
31John Calvin Comm on Psalms (V3)
possessing as he did the approving testimony of a good conscience, he regards in a great measure
with indifference the unjust estimate which men might form of his character. It were indeed desirable
that our integrity should also be acknowledged and approved of by men, and that not so much on
our own account as for the edification of our brethren. But if, after we have done all in our power
to make men form a favorable opinion respecting us, they misconstruct and pervert every good
word which we utter, and every good action which we perform, we ought to maintain such greatness
of mind as boldly to despise the world and all false accusers, resting contented with the judgment
of God and with that alone; for those who are over anxious about maintaining their good name
cannot but often experience fainting of heart. Let us be always ready to satisfy men; but if they
refuse to listen to what we have to say in self-vindication, let us proceed in our course through evil
report as well as good report, following the example of Paul where he fearlessly appeals to the
judgment of God,
“who will bring to light the hidden things of dark,”
(1 Corinthians 4:5 )
Psalm 69:6-9
6. O Jehovah, Lord of Hosts! let not them that wait for thee be ashamed in me: let not them
who seek thee be put to shame in me, O God of Israel! 7. For on thy account I have suffered
reproach: shame hath covered my face. 8. I have been a stranger to my brethren, and am become
an alien to the children of my mother. 739. For the zeal of thy house hath eaten me up; and the
reproach of them that reproached thee are fallen upon me.
 
6 O Jehovah, Lord of Hosts! let not them that wait for thee be ashamed in me.  David declares
that he is set forth as an example from which all the people of God may derive matter either of
hope or despair. Although he was held in detestation and execrated by the great body of the people,
there yet remained a few who were ready to bear just and impartial testimony to his innocence;
knowing as they did that he was unrighteously afflicted by his persecutors, that he constantly reposed
on the grace and goodness of God, and that no temptations could discourage or prevent him from
continuing steadfast in the practice of true godliness. But when they observed the distresses and
calamities to which he was notwithstanding subjected, the only conclusion to which they were able
to arrive was, that all the pains and labor which he had taken in devoutly serving God were entirely
thrown away. As all the instances in which God extends his succor to his servants are so many
seals, by which he confirms and gives us assurance of his goodness and grace towards us, the
faithful must have been exceedingly discouraged had David been forsaken in the extremity of his
73 In the East, where polygamy prevails, those who are children of the same father, but by different mothers, scarcely look
upon each other as brothers and sisters at all, but as strangers or enemies; while those who are children of the same mother regard
each other with peculiarly strong affection. Hence said Gibeon to Zebah and Zalmunna, who had put to death his brethren, “They
were my brethren, even the sons of my mother; as the Lord liveth, if ye had saved them alive, I would not slay you,” ( Judges
8:19.) It therefore greatly aggravated the affliction of David that he had “become an alien to the children of his mother,” from
whom he might have expected affection and sympathy, however much he might have been disregarded by his brethren, who
were the children of his father’s other wives. See volume 2, p. 277, note 3.
32John Calvin Comm on Psalms (V3)
distress. The danger of their being thus discouraged he now lays before God; not that God has ever
need of being put in mind of any thing, but because he allows us to deal familiarly with him at the
throne of grace. The word wait is properly to be understood of hope, and the expression to seek
God, of prayer. The connecting of the two together teaches us the profitable lesson, that faith is not
all inactive principle, since it is the means of stirring us up to seek God.
7For on thy account I have suffered reproach  He now expresses more distinctly what he had
stated ironically in the fifth verse, where he asserts that his faults were not hidden from God. Nay,
he proceeds farther, declaring not only that the evil treatment which he met with from his enemies
was unjust and altogether unmerited, but also that his cause was really God’s cause, since whatever
he had undertaken and engaged in was expressly in obedience to the command of God. Saul no
doubt had other reasons, or at least other pretences, for persecuting David; but as the hatred which
he entertained against him most unquestionably proceeded from God’s having called and anointed
him to be king, David here justly protests that it was not for any wickedness which he had committed,
but because he had obeyed God, that men in general disapproved of and rashly condemned him. It
is a source of great consolation to true believers when they can protest that they have the warrant
and call of God for whatever they undertake or engage in. If we are hated by the world for making
a public confession of the faith, a thing which we are to expect, it being evident from observation
that the wicked ordinarily are never more fierce than when they assault the truth of God and the
true religion, we have ground to entertain double confidence. 74 We also learn from this passage
how monstrous is the malice of men, who convert into a ground for reproach and reprehension the
zeal for the Divine glory by which true believers are animated. 75 But it is well for us that God not
only wipes away the reproaches with which the wicked load us, but also so ennobles them, that
they surpass all the honors and triumphs of the world. The Psalmist farther aggravates his complaint
by the additional circumstance, that he was cruelly cast off by his own relations and friends; from
which we are taught, that when by our devotedness to the cause of religion we cannot avoid exciting
the displeasure of our brethren against us, it is our duty simply to follow God, and not to confer
with flesh and blood.
9For the zeal of thy house hath eaten me up76 David’s enemies, no doubt, professed that nothing
was farther from their mind than to touch the sacred name of God; but he reproves their hypocritical
pretences, and affirms that he is fighting in God’s quarrel. The manner in which he did this, he
shows, was by the zeal for the Church of God with which his soul was inflamed. He not only assigns
the cause of the evil treatment which he received — his zeal for the house of God — but also
declares that whatever evil treatment he was undeservedly made the object of, yet, as it were,
forgetting himself, he burned with a holy zeal to maintain the Church, and at the same time the
glory of God, with which it is inseparably connected. To make this the more obvious, let it be
observed, that although all boast in words of allowing to God the glory which belongs to him; yet
74 That is, the confidence arising from the reflection that we are, in the first place, suffering unjustly; and, secondly , that we
are suffering in the cause of God.
75 “Qui convertissent en diffame et blasme le desir que les fideles ont de sa gloire .” — Fr.
76 The verb means not only ‘to eat up, to devour,’ but ‘to corrode or consume,’ by separating the parts from each other, as
fire, (see Parkhurst on     2;) and the radical import of the Hebrew word for ‘zeal,’ seems to be ‘to eat into, corrode, as fire.’ The
word (says Parkhurst) is, in the Hebrew Bible, generally applied to the fervent or ardent affections of the human frame, the
effects of which are well known to be even like those of fire, corroding and consuming; and, accordingly, the poets, both ancient
and modern, abound with descriptions of these ardent and consuming affections, taken from fire and its effects. (See on    .)” —
Mant
33John Calvin Comm on Psalms (V3)
when the law, the rule of virtuous and holy living, presents its claims to them, men only mock him,
and not only so, but they furiously rush against him by the opposition which they make to his Word.
They do this as if he willed to be honored and served merely with the breath of the lip, and had not
rather erected a throne among men, from which to govern them by laws. David, therefore, here
places the Church in the room of God; not that it was his intention to transfer to the Church what
is proper to God, but to show the vanity of the pretensions which men make of being the people of
God, when they shake themselves loose from the control of God’s holy law, of which the Church
is the faithful guardian. Besides, David had to deal with a class of men who, although a hypocritical
and bastard race, professed to be the people of God; for all who adhered to Saul boasted of having
a place in the Church, and stigmatised David as an apostate or a rotten member. With this unworthy
treatment David was so far from being discouraged, that he willingly sustained all assaults for the
defense of the true Church. He declares that he is unmoved by all the wrongs and revilings which
he personally suffered at the hands of his enemies. Laying aside all concern about himself, he is
disquieted and distressed only for the oppressed condition of the Church, or rather burns with
anguish, and is consumed with the vehemence of his grief.
The second clause of the verse is to the same effect, denoting that he has nothing separate from
God. Some explain it in a different sense, understanding it to mean that the wicked and proud, with
the view of making an assault upon David, directed their fury and violence against God himself,
and in this way indirectly pierced the heart of this holy man with their blasphemies, knowing as
they did that nothing would be more grievous to him to bear than this. But this interpretation is too
forced. Equally forced is that of those who consider David as intimating that he did not less prostrate
himself in humble supplication at the mercy-seat whenever he heard the name of God torn by
reproaches and blasphemy, than if he himself had been guilty of treason against the Divine Majesty.
I therefore adhere to the opinion which I have already expressed, That David forgot what concerned
himself, and that all the grief which he felt proceeded from the holy zeal with which he burned
when he saw the sacred name of God insulted and outraged with horrible blasphemies. By this
example we are taught, that whereas we are naturally so tender and delicate as to be unable to bear
ignominy and reproach, we must endeavor to get quit of this unhappy state of mind, and ought
rather to be grieved and agonised with the reproaches which are poured forth against God. On
account of these, it becomes us to feel deep indignation, and even to give expression to this in
strong language; but we ought to bear the wrongs and reproaches which we personally suffer without
complaining. Until we have learned to set very little value upon our own reputation, we will never
be inflamed with true zeal in contending for the preservation and advancement of the interests of
the Divine glory. Besides, as David speaks in the name of the whole Church, whatever he says
concerning himself behoved to be fulfilled in the supreme Head. It is, therefore, not surprising to
find the Evangelists applying this passage to Christ, ( John 2:17 .) In like manner, Paul, in Romans
15:3, 5, 6 , exhorting the faithful to imitate Christ, applies the second member to them all, and there
also teaches us that the doctrine contained in it is very comprehensive, requiring them to devote
themselves wholly to the advancement of the Divine glory, to endeavor in all their words and actions
to preserve it unimpaired, and to be carefully on their guard that it may not be obscured by any
fault of theirs. Since Christ, in whom there shines forth all the majesty of Deity, did not hesitate to
expose himself to every species of reproach for the maintenance of his Father’s glory, how base
and shameful will it be for us to shrink from a similar lot.
34John Calvin Comm on Psalms (V3)
Psalm 69:10-13
10. And I wept, my soul fasted; and that was laid to me as a reproach. 11. I also made sackcloth
my clothing: and I became a proverb to them. 12. They who sit in the gate defame me: and I am
the song of those who drink intoxicating liquor. 13. But as for me, my prayer is to thee, O Jehovah!
in a time of thy favor, [or good-will,] O God: answer me in the multitude of thy mercy, in the truth
of thy salvation.
 
10.And I wept, my soul fasted  David here proves, by the signs or effects, that his efforts to
promote the Divine glory proceeded from a pure and well-regulated zeal, inasmuch as he was not
impelled or inflamed by the impetuosity of the flesh, but rather humbly abased himself before God,
choosing him to be the witness of his sorrow. By this he shows the more evidently the incorrigible
perversity of his enemies. It frequently happens, that those who set themselves boldly for the
vindication of the glory of God, provoke and exasperate the wicked to a higher pitch by opposing
them contentiously and without moderation. But David’s zeal was so tempered that it ought to have
softened even the hardness of steel. By this circumstance he, however, intended to show that he
was oppressed with such violence by the frowardness of his enemies, that he dared not even open
his mouth to speak a single word in defense of the cause of God, and no other means were left him
of defending it but tears and mourning. He was deprived, as we know, of the liberty of giving
utterance to the sentiments of his heart, or rather his words, as being those of a condemned person,
would have been repelled with cruel reproaches. It was a proof of the greater constancy when in
such circumstances he continued to burn with a zeal as unabated as ever, and persevered in the
voluntary sorrow which he had engaged to exercise with the view of maintaining the honor and
glory of God. He accordingly declares, that he wept and that his soul fasted, and that he was clothed
with sackcloth; which were the tokens of mourning among the Jews. But his enemies turned all
these things into mockery and jesting; 77 from which it is manifest that they were carried away with
the fury of demons. It is of importance for us to be fortified with such an example, that in the present
day we may not be discouraged when we meet with the same perversity by which the enemies of
the Gospel prove themselves to be rather devils than men. We must, however, beware of pouring
oil upon the fire which is already burning too fiercely, and should rather imitate David and Lot,
who, although they had not liberty to rebuke the wicked, were yet deeply grieved in their hearts.
And even when the wicked are constrained to hear us, mildness and humility will be a powerful
means, or rather will be the best seasoning, for tempering holy zeal. Those who conceive of David
as intimating that he resigned himself to suffer punishment in the room or stead of his enemies,
attempt to confirm their opinion from his having clothed himself in sackcloth. But I take it more
simply as meaning, that when he saw things in such a state of confusion, he voluntarily engaged
in this sorrowful exercise to testify that nothing was more grievous to him than to witness the sacred
name of God exposed to contumely.
12.They who sit in the gate defame me  Had David been molested only by vulgar buffoons and
the refuse of the people, it would have been more easily endured; for it is not surprising that mean
persons, who have no regard to what is becoming and honorable, degrade themselves by indulging
77 “That was turned to my reproach ; i.e., it was made a subject of reproach to me.” — Cresswell .
35John Calvin Comm on Psalms (V3)
in defamation without shame. But when the very judges, forgetful of what is demanded by the
dignity of their office, abandon themselves to the same audacious conduct, the iniquity and baseness
of it is greatly aggravated. Accordingly, David expressly complains that he was made a by-word
and a proverb by those in the highest ranks of life. The opinion of some who, by the expression,
they who sit in the gate, understand the whole people, 78 is both frigid and inconsistent with the
words of the text; for although men of every rank and condition assembled at the gates, yet none
but the judges and counsellors sat there. 79 This is confirmed by the second clause of the verse; for
by those who drink strong drink,80 is doubtless meant the rulers who were elevated by their wealth
and dignity. It was, indeed, very cruel treatment, that this holy man was not only harassed by the
lower classes of the people, but that the very persons who presided in the cause of justice, and the
dignitaries of the Church, were in this ringleaders to others. As the same thing happens in our own
day, it is not without cause that the Holy Spirit has set this example before our eyes. In the Papacy
we find that the higher a man is exalted in honor, he is proportionally the more violent and outrageous
in his opposition to the Gospel and its ministers, that he may exhibit himself a more valiant defender
of the Catholic faith. Yea, this is a malady with which almost all kings and princes are smitten;
which arises from their not regarding true dignity and excellence as consisting in virtue, and from
their thinking that they are entitled to act without restraint as they please. And what is the estimation
in which they hold the faithful servants of Christ? It is a fact which cannot be denied, that one of
the principal things about which they are concerned is, to scoff at and defame them, not only at
their tables, but also on their thrones, in order, if possible, to shame them into a renunciation of
their faith. In general, also, they sneer at all the people of God, and enjoy themselves in descanting
upon their simplicity, as if they were fools in wearying and wasting themselves in the service of
God.
13.But as for me, my prayer is to thee, O Jehovah!  It was a sign of uncommon virtue in David,
that even this hard treatment could not shake his mind, and sink him into despondency. He informs
us of the means by which he fortified himself against that terrible stumbling-block. When the wicked
directed against him their witty and scoffing remarks, as if engines of war, to overthrow his faith,
the means to which he had recourse for repelling all their assaults was pouring out his heart in
prayer to God. He was constrained to keep silence before men, and, being thus driven out from the
world, he betook himself to God. In like manner, although the faithful in the present day may be
unable to make any impression upon the wicked, yet they will ultimately triumph, provided they
retire from the world, and go directly to God to present their prayers before him. The meaning, in
short, is, that David, having tried every means in his power, and finding that his labor was to no
purpose, left off dealing with men, and dealt with God only. What follows, a time of thy favor, O
God!  is explained otherwise by many interpreters, who read the two clauses of the verse in one
78 “They that sit in the gate  — vain and idle persons who spent their time there, in which there used to be a confluence of
people.” — Rosenmuller . “They that sit in the gate ; i.e., the elders. The expression may, however, be put for the crowd assembled
there to hear the decisions of the magistrates: compare 2 Kings 7:1-18 .” — Cresswell .
79 Judges sat there in the exercise of their judicial functions; the gates of cities being anciently the places where courts of
judicature were held for trying all causes, and deciding all affairs. See Job 29:7 , compared with verses 12, 16, and 17 ; Deuteronomy
25:7; Ruth 4:1, 2 ; 1 Kings 22:10 ; Esther 2:19 .
80 “Bibentes siceram .” —  Lat. Cresswell has the following note on this clause of the verse: “More literally, I am the subject
of the songs of them that drink sicera . Sicera was, according to Chrysostom, an intoxicating liquor, made from the juice of the
palm-tree; the fruit of that tree being bruised and fermented, was probably the beverage of the lower orders, like the bouza of
Æthiopia.”
36John Calvin Comm on Psalms (V3)
sentence, thus: But as for me, I prayed to God in a time of his favor;  corresponding to that passage
in Isaiah 55:6 , “Call ye upon him while he is near.” Others resolve it thus: I prayed that the time
of favor might come, and that God would begin to be merciful to me. But David is rather speaking
of the consolation which he then received by reflecting with himself, that although it was now a
time of trouble with him, and although his prayers seemed to be altogether unavailing, yet God’s
favor would have its turn also. Thus the Prophet Habakkuk says,
“I will stand upon my watch, and set me upon the tower, and will
watch to see what he will say unto me.” ( Habakkuk 2:1 )
In like manner, Isaiah says,
“I will wait upon the Lord, that hideth his face from the house of Jacob;” ( Isaiah 8:17 )
and Jeremiah 14:22 ,) “We will wait upon thee.” The only means by which, in our affliction,
we can obtain the victory, is by our having hope shining in us in the midst of darkness, and by our
having the sustaining influence which arises from waiting for the favor of God. After David has
thus fortified himself for continued perseverance in the attitude of waiting, he immediately adds,
Answer me in the multitude of thy goodness; and to goodness he joins the truth of salvation,81
intimating that God’s mercy is proved by indubitable effect when he succours his servants who are
reduced to the very depths of despair. What prompted him to present this prayer was, the full
persuasion which he had, that the darkness in which he was now involved would in due time be
dispelled, and that a serene and unclouded season of God’s favor would succeed; a persuasion
which arose from his recalling all his thoughts to God, lest he should faint by reason of the harassing
treatment which he met with from the wicked.
Psalm 69:14-18
14. Deliver me from the mire, that I may not sink: let me be delivered from my adversaries,
and from the deep waters. 15. Let not the flood of waters overflow me; and let not the deep swallow
me up; and let not the pit 82 close its mouth upon me. 16. Answer me, O Jehovah! for thy mercy 83
is good: in the multitude of thy compassions 84 look upon me.  17. And hide not thy face from thy
servant; for I am in trouble: hasten! answer me! 18. Draw near to my soul, redeem it; deliver me,
on account of my enemies.
 
14.Deliver me from the mire, that I may not sink. The Psalmist repeats the same similitude
which he had used before, but in a different manner. He had previously said that he was sunk in
the mire, and now he prays that he may not sink in it. In short, he now prays that those things may
not now befall him which he had formerly complained of as having befallen him. But it is very
easy to reconcile this diversity of statement; for in the opening of the psalm he spake according to
his actual feeling and experience; but now, looking to the issue, although living in the midst of
81 Dr Wells explains, the truth of thy salvation , as meaning, “according to the promises thou hast made of saving me.”
82 “The Chaldee interpreter understands by the pit , Gehenna.” — Cresswell .
83 The original word    , chesed , here translated mercy , signifies, as Dr Adam Clarke observes, “ exuberance of kindness .”
84      , rachamecha , for compassions , signifies, according to the same author, such affection as mothers bear to their young,
and in God there is   , rob, a multitude of these.
37John Calvin Comm on Psalms (V3)
death, he cherishes the hope of deliverance. This is expressed still more clearly in the last clause
of the 15th verse, where he prays, Let not the pit close its mouth upon me;  which is as if he had
said, Let not the great multitude and weight of my afflictions overwhelm me, and let not sorrow
swallow me up.
16. Answer me, O Jehovah! for thy mercy is good.  The appeal which he here makes to the mercy
and compassion of God is an evidence of the distressed condition into which he was brought. There
can be no doubt that he sustained a dreadful conflict, when he had recourse to these as the only
means of his safety. It is a very difficult matter to believe that God is merciful to us when he is
angry with us, and that he is near us when he has withdrawn himself from us. David, aware of this,
brings to his view a subject which he may oppose to this distrust, and by pleading for the exercise
of the mercy and great compassions of God towards him, shows, that the only consideration which
inspired him with hope was the benignant and merciful character of God. When he says, a little
after, Look upon me,  it is a prayer that God would make it manifest in very deed that he had heard
him by granting him succor. In the following verse he utters a similar prayer. And by repeating so
often the same things, he declares both the bitterness of his grief and the ardor of his desires. When
he beseeches God not to hide his face, it is not from any apprehension which he entertained of
being rejected, but because those who are oppressed with calamities cannot avoid being agitated
and distracted with mental disquietude. But as God, in a peculiar manner, invites his servants to
him, David avows that he is one of their number. In thus speaking, as I have already shown, and
will afterwards have occasion to state at greater length, he does not boast of services on account
of which he could prefer any claim to a divine reward, but rather depends on the gratuitous election
of God; although, at the same time, he is to be understood as adducing the service which he had
faithfully yielded to God by whom he was called, as an evidence of his godliness.
18. Draw near to my soul, redeem it.  David was doubtless fully persuaded by faith that God
was near him; but as we are accustomed to measure the presence or absence of God by the effects,
David here tacitly complains, judging according to the flesh, that he is far from him. By the
expression, Draw near, he means, that in so far as could be gathered from his actual condition, God
appeared to have no regard to his welfare. Again, by calling upon God to draw near to his life,
which he seemed to have forsaken, he exhibits a striking proof of the strength of his faith. The more
cruelly he is molested by the wicked and proud, the more does he trust that God will appear to
deliver him. As has been elsewhere observed, it is always to be held as an undoubted truth, that
since “God resisteth the proud” ( James 4:6 ,) he must at length repress the insolence and pride of
those who obstinately resist him, although he may seem to connive at them for a time.
Psalm 69:19-21
19. Thou knowest my reproach, and my confusion, and my ignominy: all my adversaries are
before thee. 20. Reproach hath broken my heart, and I am afflicted: and I looked for one to take
pity upon me, but there was none; and for comforters, but I found none.  21. And they put gall into
my meat; and in my thirst they gave me vinegar to drink.
 
38John Calvin Comm on Psalms (V3)
19 Thou knowest my reproach, and my confusion. This is a confirmation of the preceding
sentence. Whence is it that the greater part of men become dispirited when they see the wicked
outrageously rushing upon them, and their wickedness, like a water-flood, carrying all before it,
but because they think that heaven is so obscured and overcast with clouds as to prevent God from
beholding what is done upon the earth? It becomes us, therefore, in this matter, to call to our
remembrance the doctrine of a Divine Providence, that contemplating it we may be assured beyond
all doubt, that God will appear for our succor in due season; for he cannot, on the one hand, shut
his eyes to our miseries, and it is impossible for him, on the other, to allow the license which the
wicked take in doing evil to pass with impunity, without denying himself. David, therefore, takes
comfort from the consideration that God is the witness of his grief, fear, sorrows, and cares; nothing
being hidden from the eye of Him who is the judge and governor of the world. Nor is it a vain
repetition when he speaks so frequently of his reproach and shame. As he was subjected to such
dreadful assaults of temptations as might have made the stoutest heart to tremble, it was indispensably
necessary for his own defense to oppose to them a strong barrier for resistance. Nothing is more
bitter to men of an ingenuous and noble spirit than reproach; but when this is repeated, or rather
when shame and reproach are heaped upon us, how needful is it then for us to possess more than
ordinary strength, that we may not thereby be overwhelmed? for when succor is delayed, our
patience is very apt to give way, and despair very easily creeps in upon us. This shame and reproach
may very properly be referred both to the outward appearance and to the actual feelings of the
mind. It is well known that he was everywhere held in open derision; and the mockeries which he
experienced could not but strike into him both shame and sorrow. For the same reason he subjoins
that his enemies are before God, or known to him; as if he had said, Lord, thou knowest how, like
a poor sheep, I am surrounded by thousands of wolves.
20. Reproach hath broken my heart, and I am afflicted.  He expresses more distinctly not only
that he was confounded, or ashamed at the sad aspect which he presented of having been deserted,
but that he was well nigh overwhelmed with sorrow by lying so long under reproach and shame.
Whence it is evident that he did not overcome this sorrow without a struggle; and that the reason
why he so firmly withstood the waves of temptations was, not because they did not reach his heart,
but because, being sorely smitten, he made resistance with a corresponding degree of intrepidity.
He states, as an additional aggravation of his distress, that every office of humanity was withheld
from him: that there was nobody who had compassion upon him, or to whom he could disburden
his griefs. Some take the word    , nud, for to tell or recount; and undoubtedly when we pour out
our complaints to our friends, it affords some alleviation to our distress. Thus he employs as an
argument for obtaining mercy from God, the consideration that he was deprived of all aid and
comfort from his fellow-men.
21.And they put gall into my meat.  Here he again repeats that his enemies carry their cruelty
towards him to the utmost extent in their power. He speaks metaphorically when he describes them
as mingling gall or poison with his meat,85and vinegar with his drink; even as it is said in Jeremiah,
85 The word    , rosh, here denominated gall, is thought by Celsius, Michaelis, Boothroyd, and others, to be hemlock  According
to Dr Adam Clarke and Williams, it refers to bitters in general, and particularly those of a deleterious nature. Bochart, from a
comparison of this passage with John 19:29 , thinks that    , rosh, is the same herb as the Evangelist calls ὑσσωπος , “hyssop;” a
species of which growing in Judea, he proves from Isaac Ben Orman, an Arabian writer, to be so bitter, as not to be eatable.
Theophylact expressly tells us that the hyssop was added as being deleterious or poisonous; and ‘Nonnus’ paraphrase is, “one
gave the deadly acid mixed with hyssop.” See Parkhurst on    . The word occurs in Deuteronomy 29:18; 32:33 ; and is, in the
39John Calvin Comm on Psalms (V3)
“Behold, I will feed them, even this people, with wormwood,
and give them water of gall to drink.” ( Jeremiah 9:15 )
But still the Apostle John justly declares that this Scripture was fulfilled when the soldiers gave
Christ vinegar to drink upon the cross, ( John 19:28-30 ;) for it was requisite that whatever cruelty
the reprobate exercise towards the members of Christ, should by a visible sign be represented in
Christ himself. We have stated on the same principle, in our remarks  upon Psalm 22:18 , that when
the soldiers parted the garments of Christ among them, that verse was appropriately quoted, “They
parted my garments among them, and upon my vesture did they cast lots;” although David’s object
was to express by figurative language that he was robbed, and that all his goods were violently
taken from him, and made a prey of by his enemies. The natural sense must, however, be retained;
which is, that the holy prophet had no relief afforded him; and that he was in a condition similar
to that of a man who, already too much afflicted, found, as an additional aggravation of his distress,
that his meat was poisoned, and his drink rendered nauseous by the bitter ingredients with which
it had been mingled.
Psalm 69:22-29
22. Let 86 their table before them be for a snare; and their prosperity 87 [or things for peace] for
a net. 23. Let their eyes be darkened, that they may not see; and make their loins continually to
tremble.  24. Pour out thy wrath upon them; and let thy hot displeasure seize them. 25. Let their
habitation be desolate; let none dwell in their tent; 26. For they have persecuted him whom thou
hast smitten; and they have added to the grief of those whom thou hast wounded, [literally of thy
wounded ones.]  27. Add iniquity to their iniquity; and let them not enter into thy righteousness.
28. Let them be blotted out from the book of the living; and let them not be written among the
righteous. 29. As for me, I am poor and sorrowful; thy salutation shall exalt me.
 
latter place, rendered poison  In Hosea 10:4 , it is rendered hemlock ; and in Amos 6:12 , it is put in apposition with a word there
translated hemlock , although the same word is also rendered wormwood
Vinegar , we conceive, here means sour wine, such as was given to slaves or prisoners in the East. Persons in better
circumstances used lemons or pomegranates to give their drink a grateful acidity. It was therefore a great insult offered to a royal
personage to give him in his thirst the refreshment of a slave or of a wretched prisoner; and David employs this figure to express
the insults which were offered to him by his enemies. See Harmer ’s Observations , volume 2, pp. 158, 159.
86 This and the following verses, which are here expressed in the form of imprecations, are translated by many in the future
tense, as predictions: “Their table before them shall be for a snare,” etc.
87 The LXX. have rendered the word here translated prosperity by a word which signifies recompense : “Let their table before
them be for a snare, και είς ἀνταπόδοσιν , and for a recompense , and for a stumbling-block.” Paul, in quoting this and the verse
immediately following, as descriptive of the judgments which befell the Jews after their rejection of the Messiah, quotes with
some slight difference the words of the LXX. He has, Εἰς ἀνταπόομα αὐτοῖς ,“for a retribution upon them.” The Psalmist’s
enemies had given him gall for his meat, and in his thirst vinegar to drink, and he denounces on them evils similar in kind: as if
he had said, Would that their own table may be made bitter by misery and misfortune, and the food provided for the nourishment
and strengthening of their bodies turned, in the righteous retribution of God, into the means of their injury and destruction.
“Michaelis,” says Walford, “shows how exactly these comminations were fulfilled in the history of the final siege of Jerusalem
by the Romans. Many thousands of the Jews had assembled in the city to eat the Paschal lamb, when Titus unexpectedly made
an assault upon them. In this siege the greater part of the inhabitants of Jerusalem miserably perished.”
40John Calvin Comm on Psalms (V3)
22. Let their table before them be for a snare.  Here we have a series of dire imprecations, with
respect to which we must bear in mind, what we have elsewhere observed, that David did not allow
himself recklessly to pour out his wrath, even as the greater part of men, when they feel themselves
wronged, intemperately give way to their own passion; but, being under the guidance of the Holy
Spirit, he was kept from going beyond the bounds of duty, 88 and simply called upon God to exercise
just judgment against the reprobate. Farther, it was not on his own account that he pleaded in this
manner; but it was a holy zeal for the divine glory which impelled him to summon the wicked to
God’s judgment-seat. It was also owing to this: that he was not carried away by violence of passion,
like those who are actuated by a desire of taking revenge. Since, then, the Spirit of wisdom,
uprightness, and moderation, put these imprecations into the mouth of David, his example cannot
justly be pleaded in self-vindication by those who pour forth their wrath and spite upon every one
that comes in their way, or who are carried away by a foolish impatience to take revenge; never
allowing themselves to reflect for a moment what good purpose this can serve, nor making any
efforts to keep their passion within due bounds. We need wisdom by which to distinguish between
those who are wholly reprobate and those of whose amendment there is still some hope; we have
also need of uprightness, that none may devote himself exclusively to his own private interests;
and of moderation too, to dispose our minds to calm endurance. It being evident, then, that David
was distinguished by these three qualities, whoever would follow him aright, must not allow himself
to break forth with reckless and blind impetuosity into the language of imprecation; he must,
moreover, repress the turbulent passions of his mind, and, instead of confining his thoughts
exclusively to his own private interests, should rather employ his desires and affections in seeking
to advance the glory of God. In short, if we would be true imitators of David, we must first clothe
ourselves with the character of Christ, that he may not administer to us at the present day the same
rebuke which he gave to two of his disciples of old,
“Ye know not what manner of spirit ye are of,”
(Luke 9:55 .)
David had complained that his enemies mingled his meat with gall; and now he prays that their
table may be turned into a snare for them, and that the things which are for peace may be turned
into a net for them. These expressions are metaphorical, and they imply a desire that whatever
things had been allotted to them in providence for the preservation of life, and for their welfare and
convenience, might be turned by God into the occasion or instrument of their destruction. From
this we gather that as things which naturally and of themselves are hurtful, become the means of
furthering our welfare when we are in favor with God; so, when his anger is kindled against us, all
those things which have a native tendency to produce our happiness are cursed, and become so
many causes of our destruction. It is an instance of the Divine justice, which ought deeply to impress
our minds with awe, when the Holy Spirit declares that all the means of preserving life are deadly
to the reprobate, ( Titus 1:15 ;) so that the very sun, which carries healing under his wings, ( Malachi
4:2,) breathes only a deadly exhalation for them.
23. Let their eyes be darkened, that they may not see.  The Psalmist here refers chiefly to two
powers of the body, those of the eyes and of the loins; and I have no hesitation in considering his
language as a prayer that God would deprive his enemies of reason and understanding, and at the
same time enfeeble their strength, that they might be altogether unfitted for exerting themselves in
88 “Mais estant conduit par le Sainct Esprit, il n’a point passe outre les limites .” — Fr.
41John Calvin Comm on Psalms (V3)
any way. We know how indispensable it is, in order to the doing of any thing aright, that counsel
go before to give light, and that there should also be added the power of putting what is purposed
into execution. The curse here expressed impends over the heads of all the enemies of the Church;
and, therefore, we have no reason to be terrified at the malice or fury of the wicked. God, whenever
he pleases, can strike them suddenly with blindness, that they may see nothing, and by breaking
their loins, 89 lay them prostrate in shame and confusion.
24. Pour out thy fury upon them.  It is not surprising that David utters a lengthened series of
imprecations; for we know well that the frantic enemies of the Church, into whom it was his object
to inspire terror, are not easily moved. He therefore lifts up his voice against them in tones of greater
vehemence, that they might be led to desist from their wrongful and insolent conduct. He, however,
had principally an eye to true believers, who, being oppressed with calamities, have no other stay
to lean upon, but such as arises from the voice which they hear proceeding from the mouth of God,
declaring the terrible vengeance which is prepared for their enemies, if, indeed, they are among the
reprobate. As to those of whose repentance and amendment there was some hope, David would
have had them to be corrected by chastisements; but as to those whose repentance and reformation
were hopeless, he prays that destruction may fall upon their heads, that thus they might not escape
the punishment which was appointed for them, and which they had deserved.
25 Let their habitation be desolate.  Here he proceeds farther than in the preceding verse, praying
that God would cause his wrath to descend to their posterity; and it is no new thing for the sins of
the fathers to be cast into the bosom of the children. As David uttered these imprecations by the
inspiration and influence of the Holy Spirit, so he took them out of the law itself, in which God
threatens that he will
“visit the iniquity of the fathers upon the children unto the third and fourth generation of them
that hate him,” ( Exodus 20:5 )
In this way he desires that the memorial of them may be cursed, and that thus God would not
spare them even after their death.
26. For they have persecuted him whom thou hast smitten.  He brings forward the crime with
which they were chargeable, to make it manifest that they richly deserved such dreadful punishments.
Some explain the verse in this way: “These enemies, O Lord! not content with the strokes which
thou hast inflicted, have exercised their cruelty upon a wretched man, who had already been wounded
by thy hand.” And as it is the dictate of humanity to succor the afflicted, he who treads down the
oppressed most assuredly betrays the brutal cruelty of his disposition. Others reject this exposition,
whether upon sufficient ground I know not, observing that David, properly speaking, was not
stricken or wounded by the hand of God, it being of the violent rage of his enemies that he complains
through the whole of the psalm. Accordingly, they have recourse to a subtle interpretation, and
view David as meaning that his enemies wickedly pretended that they had just cause against him,
and boasted of being the ministers of God, whose office it was to execute punishment upon him as
a wicked person. This is a pretext under which the wicked generally shield themselves, and by
which they are led to think that they may lawfully do what they please against those who are in
misery, without ever being called to account for it. Thus we find this purpose of the wicked expressed
in another place,
89 The loins are the seat of strength in every animal; and hence the prayer, “Make their loins continually to tremble,” is just
a prayer that their strength might be impaired, or entirely taken away.
42John Calvin Comm on Psalms (V3)
“Come let us persecute him, for God hath forsaken him;
for there is none to deliver him,” ( Psalm 71:11 .)
But I am rather of opinion that the Psalmist applies the term smitten to the man whom God
intended to humble as one of his own children; so that in the very chastisement or correction, there
was engraven a mark of God’s paternal love. And he employs the expression, the wounded of God,
almost in the same sense in which Isaiah 26:19  speaks of the dead of God, the prophet thereby
denoting those who continue under the Divine guardianship, even in death itself. This cannot be
extended to all men in general, but is exclusively applicable to true believers, whose obedience
God puts to the test by means of afflictions. If from this the wicked take occasion to persecute the
righteous with greater severity, it is not to be wondered at if they involve themselves in heavier
damnation. Upon seeing such examples set before them, the manner in which they should have
reasoned with themselves is this,
“If these things are done in a green tree,
what shall be done in the dry?” ( Luke 23:31 .)
But from their becoming more and more hardened, it is evident that the pride and insolence
which they manifest against the children of God proceed from contempt and hatred of true religion.
The Hebrew word      , yesapperu, which is usually translated they will recount, I would interpret
differently. It properly signifies to number, and may, therefore, be properly enough translated to
add to or increase,90 giving here the meaning, That the persons spoken of, by adding misery to
misery, raised grief to its utmost height.
27. Add iniquity to their iniquity.  As the Hebrew word    , avon, signifies at times guilt as well
as iniquity, some translate the verse thus, Add thou, that is, thou, O God! punishment to their
punishment  Others extend it yet further, regarding it as a prayer that wicked men might punish
them for their wickedness. But it is abundantly evident, from the second clause, that what David
prays for rather is, as is almost universally admitted, that God, taking his Spirit altogether from the
wicked, would give them over to a reprobate mind, that they might never seek or have any desire
to be brought to genuine repentance and amendment. Some interpret the phrase to come into
righteousness  as meaning to be absolved or acquitted;91 but it seems to want the spirit of the
language here used, by which David intends to express much more. Accordingly, the words ought
to be expounded thus: Let their wickedness increase more and more, and let them turn away with
abhorrence from all thought of amendment, to make it manifest that they are utterly alienated from
God. 92 As this form of expression is familiar to the Sacred Writings, and every where to be met
with, we ought not to think it harsh; and to wrest it, as some do, for the sake of avoiding what may
have the appearance of absurdity, is ridiculous. The explanation they give of it is, That God adds
sins to sins by permitting them; 93 and they defend such an exposition by asserting that this is an
90This is the translation given by the LXX., who read, προσέθηκαν , “they added to;” and similar is that of the Syriac, Vulgate,
Arabic, and Æthiopic versions, and of the learned Castellio, who reads, “ Sauciorum tuorum numerum adaugentes ,” “increasing
the number of thy wounded.” “    ,” says Hammond, “signifies to number , and of that we know addition is one sort.”
91 This is the idea attached to it by Horsley, who translates the verse thus: “Give them punishment upon punishment, and
admit them not to thy justification.” Cresswell explains it thus: “Let them not be restored to thy favor, nor experience thy
clemency.”
92 “Qu’ils sont alienez et bannis de la presence de Dieu .” — Fr. “That they are alienated and banished from the presence of
God.”
93 This is the explanation given by Hammond. The Hebrew word    , nathan , here rendered add, he translates give or permit ,
which he supports in the following note. “That    , to give , signifies also to permit , appears by Esther 9:13 ,     , ‘let it be given to
43John Calvin Comm on Psalms (V3)
idiom of the Hebrew language, an assertion, the accuracy of which no Hebrew scholar will admit.
Nor is it necessary to bring forward any such quibbles to excuse God; for, when he blinds the
reprobate, it is sufficient for us to know that he has good and just causes for doing so; and it is in
vain for men to murmur and to dispute with him, as if they sinned only by his impulse. Although
the causes why they are blinded sometimes lie hidden in the secret purpose of Deity, there is not a
man who is not reproved by his own conscience; and it is our duty to adore and admire the high
mysteries of God, which surpass our understanding. It is justly said that “God’s judgments are a
great deep,” ( Psalm 36:6 .) It would certainly be highly perverse to involve God in a part of the guilt
of the wicked, whenever he executes his judgments upon them; as, for example, when he executes
the judgment threatened in the passage before us. The amount is, that the wicked are plunged into
a deep gulf of wickedness by the just vengeance of Heaven, that they may never return to a sound
understanding, and that he who is filthy may become still more filthy, 94 (Revelation 22:11 .) Let it
further be observed, that I do not explain the righteousness of God as denoting the righteousness
which he bestows upon his chosen ones in regenerating them by his Holy Spirit, but the holiness
manifested in the life which is so well-pleasing to him.
28. Let them be blotted out from the book of the living.95 This is the last imprecation, and it is
the most dreadful of the whole; but it nevertheless uniformly follows the persevered in impenitence
and incorrigible obduracy of which the Psalmist has spoken above. After having taken away from
them all hope of repentance, he denounces against them eternal destruction, which is the obvious
meaning of the prayer, that they might be blotted out of the book of the living; for all those must
inevitably perish who are not found written or enrolled in the book of life. This is indeed an improper
manner of speaking; but it is one well adapted to our limited capacity, the book of life being nothing
else than the eternal purpose of God, by which he has predestinated his own people to salvation.
God, it is certain, is absolutely immutable; and, further, we know that those who are adopted to the
hope of salvation were written before the foundation of the world, ( Ephesians 1:4 ;) but as God’s
eternal purpose of election is incomprehensible, it is said, in accommodation to the imperfection
of the human understanding, that those whom God openly, and by manifest signs, enrols among
his people, are written. On the other hand, those whom God openly rejects and casts out of his
Church are, for the same reason, said to be blotted out. As then David desires that the vengeance
of God may be manifested, he very properly speaks of the reprobation of his enemies in language
accommodated to our understanding; as if he had said, O God! reckon them not among the number
the Jews,’ ie., permitted them. So Exodus 12:23 , ‘And shall not suffer (the Hebrew hath    , give) the destroyer to come in; the
Chaldee reads     , ‘permit,’ and the LXX. ἀθήσει , to the same sense. So Psalm 16:10 , ‘Thou shalt not suffer (    , again, give) thy
Holy One to see corruption.’ And so        , give wickedness , is no more than permit: for so it is ordinary with God, as a punishment
of some former great sin or sins, though not to infuse any malignity, yet by withdrawing his grace, and delivering them up to
themselves, to permit more sins to follow, one on the heels of the other, and so to be so far from reforming and amending as
daily to grow worse and worse, to be more obdurate, and so finally never to enter into God’s righteousness; ie., into that way
of obedience required by him, and which will be accepted by him, or (as    , in the notion of mercy , may signify being applied
to God) into his mercy , so as to be made partakers of it.” A fuller statement and illustration of Calvin’s views on this point is
given in his Institutes, Book I. chapter 18.
94 In the French version, the two last verbs of the sentence are put in the future tense, by which the idea conveyed is somewhat
modified: “ En sorte qu’ils ne retourneront jamais, a bon sens, et celuy qui est ord, deviendra encore plus ord .” — “So that they
shall never return to a sound understanding, and he who is filthy will become still more filthy.”
95 “This phrase,” observes Bishop Mant, “which is not unusual in Scripture, alludes to the custom of well ordered cities, which
kept registers, containing all the names of the citizens. Out of these registers the names of apostates, fugitives, and criminals,
were erased, as also those of the deceased: whence the expression ‘blotting,’ or ‘erasing names from the book of life.’”
44John Calvin Comm on Psalms (V3)
or ranks of thy people, and let them not be gathered together with thy Church; but rather show by
destroying them that thou hast rejected them; and although they occupy a place for a time among
thy faithful ones, do thou at length cut them off, to make it manifest that they were aliens, though
they were mingled with the members of thy family. Ezekiel uses language of similar import when
he says,
“And mine hand shall be upon the prophets that see vanity, and that divine lies: they shall not
be in the assembly of my people, neither shall they be written in the writing of the house of Israel.”
(Ezekiel 13:9 )
That, however, continues true which is spoken by the Apostle John, ( 1 John 2:19 ,) that none
who have been once really the children of God will ever finally fall away or be wholly cut off. 96
But as hypocrites presumptuously boast that they are the chief members of the Church, the Holy
Spirit well expresses their rejection, by the figure of their being blotted out of the book of life.
Moreover, it is to be observed that, in the second clause, all the elect of God are called the righteous;
for, as Paul says in 1 Thessalonians 4:3, 4, 7 ,
“This is the will of God, even our sanctification, that every one of us should know how to
possess his vessel in sanctification and honor: for God hath not called us unto uncleanness, but
unto holiness.” ( 1 Thessalonians 4:3, 4, 7 )
And the climax which the same Apostle uses in the 8th chapter of his Epistle to the Romans,
at the 30th verse, is well known:
“Whom he did predestinate, them he also called; and whom
he called, them he also justified; and whom he justified,
them he also glorified.” ( Romans 8:30 )
29. As for me, I am poor and sorrowful.97 From this verse we perceive more distinctly how
David cast away from him the swelling and raging passion of those who, with ungovernable fury,
pour forth imprecation and vengeance. He here, without doubt, offers himself to God with the
sacrifice of a broken and humble heart, that by this meekness of spirit he may obtain favor with
him. He therefore adds immediately after, Thy salvation shall exalt me.  Those assuredly who are
impelled to avenge themselves by their own ungovernable spirits are so far from being humbled,
that they exalt themselves to a position to which they are not entitled. There is here a mutual relation
stated between the sorrow with which he was oppressed, and the help of God by which he hoped
to be lifted up. At the same time, he assures himself that the very thing which others considered as
a ground for despair, would prove to him the cause of his salvation. This sentence might also be
explained adversatively thus: Although I now mourn under the pressure of affliction, yet shall thy
salvation, O Lord! exalt me. But for my part, I consider it certain that David brings forward his
own affliction as a plea for obtaining mercy at the hand of God. Nor does he say simply that he
will be raised up, but he expressly speaks of being exalted; and in this he alludes to fortresses which
are set upon high places; for this is the proper signification of the Hebrew word    , sagab, here
employed.
96 “Et se retrancher du tout .” — Fr.
97 Boothroyd reads, “humbled and afflicted!”
45John Calvin Comm on Psalms (V3)
Psalm 69:30-33
30. I will celebrate the name of God in a song, and I will magnify him in praise. 9831. And
this will please Jehovah more than a young bullock that hath horns and hoofs. 32. The afflicted
have seen it, and those who seek God shall rejoice at it; and your heart shall live. 33. For Jehovah
hath hearkened to the afflicted; and hath not despised his prisoners.
 
30. I will celebrate the name of God in a song.  The Psalmist now elevated with joy, and sustained
by the confident hope of deliverance, sings the triumphant strains of victory. This psalm, there is
every reason to believe, was composed after he had been delivered from all apprehension of dangers;
but there can be no doubt that the very topics with which it concludes were the matter of his
meditation, when trembling with anxiety in the midst of his troubles; for he laid hold upon the grace
of God by assured faith, although that grace was then hidden from him, and only the matter of his
hope. God is here said to be magnified by our praises; not because any addition can be made to his
dignity and glory, which are infinite, but because by our praises his name is exalted among men.
31. And this will please Jehovah more than a young bullock.  The more effectually to strengthen
himself for this exercise, David affirms that the thanksgiving which he is about to tender, will be
to God a sacrifice of a sweet and an acceptable savor. There cannot be a more powerful incitement
to thanksgiving than the certain conviction that this religious service is highly pleasing to God;
even as the only recompense which he requires for all the benefits which he lavishes upon us is,
that we honor and praise his name. This sets in a stronger light the inexcusableness of those who
are so sluggish as, by their silence or forgetfulness, to suppress the praises of God. David neither
omitted nor despised the outward sacrifices which the law enjoined; but he very justly preferred
the spiritual service, which was the end of all the Levitical ceremonies. This subject I have treated
at greater length on Psalm 50:14 . By the way, the humility of David is worthy of being noticed,
who, although he rose so high as to be a heavenly pattern, yet disdained not to humble himself for
the common benefit of the Church, as if he had belonged to the common class of the people, that
by the figures of the law he might learn the truth which has since been more clearly manifested in
the gospel; namely, that the praises of God, in so far as they proceed from our mouths, are impure,
until they are sanctified by Christ. But how gross and stupid is the superstition of those who would
again bring into use the outward pomp of ceremonies which were abolished by the one sacrifice
of Christ’s death, and think that God is truly pacified when they have wearied themselves with
doing nothing! What does this amount to, but to obscure or cover, by the intervention of thick veils,
this legitimate service of thanksgiving, which David had no hesitation in greatly preferring to the
Mosaic ceremonies, although these were of divine appointment? By a young bullock, he means
one of the most choice or select and the idea which he intends to convey is, that there was no
sacrifice or victim, however valuable or precious, that he could offer, in which God would take so
great delight as in thanksgiving.
98 Venema and others conjecture, that what follows, from this verse to the end of the psalm, was added during the captivity
of the Jews in Babylon; while others, from the expressions occurring in these verses, refer the whole psalm to that period; and
observe, that the Hebrew letter  , lamed , prefixed to David’s name in the title, does not always signify of; but sometimes, as in
Genesis 1:11 , means according to ,and so may be intended to describe this psalm as being after the manner of David. But Paul,
in Romans 11:9 , ascribes it to David.
46John Calvin Comm on Psalms (V3)
32. The afflicted have seen it.  He here shows that the blessed effects of his deliverance will
extend to others as well as to himself, a point which he frequently insists on in the Psalms, as we
have seen in Psalm 22:23, 26 , and in many other places. And his object in doing this is, partly to
commend the goodness and grace of God to true believers, and partly that by this as an argument
he may prevail with God to succor him. Besides, he does not mean that God’s people would rejoice
at this spectacle merely on the ground of brotherly friendship, but because, in the deliverance of
one man, a pledge would be given to others, affording them also assurance of salvation. For this
very reason he terms them the afflicted. Whoever seek God, (says he,) although they may be
subjected to afflictions, will nevertheless take courage from my example. The first and the second
clauses of the verse must be read together; for a connected sense would not be preserved were we
not to understand the meaning to be this, That the example of David would afford a ground of
rejoicing to all the faithful servants of God when they should seek a remedy for their afflictions.
He very properly conjoins the desire of seeking God with affliction; for all men do not so profit
under the chastening hand of God as to seek salvation from him in the exercise of a sincere and
ardent faith. In the concluding part of this verse there is a change of person:  And your heart shall
live. But this apostrophe is so far from rendering the sense obscure, that, on the contrary, it expresses
it the more forcibly, as if a thing present were described. In addressing those who were so much
under the pressure of affliction as to be laid prostrate like dead men, he exhibits to their view a kind
of image of the resurrection; as if he had said, O ye who are dead! unto you new vigor shall be
restored. It is not meant that faith perishes in the children of God, and remains entirely dead until
it is quickened into life again by the example of the deliverance of others; but that the light which
was quenched is rekindled, and thus, so to speak, recovers life anew. The Psalmist immediately
after (verse 33) describes the means by which this will be brought about in the children of God,
which is, that believing the deliverance of David to be a common token or pledge of the grace of
God presented before them, they will confidently come to the conclusion, that God regards the
needy, and does not despise the prisoners. We thus see that he considers what was done to one man,
as a clear indication on the part of God that he will be ready to succor all who are in adversity. 99
Psalm 69:34-36
34. Let the heavens and the earth praise him; the seas, and whatever creepeth in them. 35. For
God will save Zion, and will build the cities of Judah; and they shall dwell there, and possess it
by inheritance. 36. And the seed of his servants shall inherit it; and they who love his name shall
dwell in it.
 
34. Let the heavens and the earth praise him.  From this we may conclude with the greater
certainty, that, as I have touched upon above, David in the whole of this psalm spake in the name
of the whole Church; for he now transfers to the Church what he had spoken in particular concerning
himself. In calling upon the elements, which are destitute of thought or understanding, to praise
God, he speaks hyperbolically, and by this manner of expression, he would teach us that we are
99 “Tous ceux qui seront oppressez a tort .” — Fr. “All who shall be wrongfully oppressed.”
47John Calvin Comm on Psalms (V3)
not animated with sufficient earnestness of heart in celebrating the praises of God, the infinitude
of which overpasses the whole world, unless we rise above our own understandings. But what
above all kindled this ardor in the heart of David was his concern for the preservation of the Church.
Moreover, there is no doubt that by the Spirit of prophecy he comprehended the whole of that period
during which God would have the kingdom and priesthood continued among the ancient people of
Israel. Yet he begins at the restoration of a new state of things, which by his means was suddenly
brought about upon the death of Saul, when a melancholy devastation threatened at once the utter
destruction of the worship of God, and the desolation of the whole country. He says, in the first
place, that Zion shall be saved, because God would defend the place where he had chosen to be
called upon, and would not suffer the worship which he himself had appointed to be abolished. In
the next place, from the ark of the covenant and the sanctuary, he represents the divine blessing as
extending to the whole land; for religion was the foundation upon which the happiness of the people
rested. He farther teaches, that this change to the better would not be of short continuance; but that
the people would be always preserved safe through the constant and enduring protection of God:
And they shall dwell there, and possess it by inheritance.  He therefore intimates, that the promise
which God had so often made in the law, That they should inherit that land forever, was truly
confirmed by the commencement of his reign. He contrasts tranquil and settled abode with a mere
temporary residence; as if he had said, Now that the sacred throne is erected, the time is come in
which the children of Abraham will enjoy the rest which has been promised to them, without fear
of being removed from it.
36. And the seed of his servants shall inherit it.  In this verse he declares that the blessing now
mentioned would extend through a continued succession of ages — that, the fathers would transmit
to their children the possession which they had received, as from hand to hand, and the children to
their children; and the enduring possession of all good things depends upon Christ, of whom David
was a type. Yet the Psalmist at the same time briefly intimates, that such only as are the legitimate
children of Abraham shall inherit the land: They who love his name shall dwell in it.  It was needful
to take away all grounds for self-gloriation from hypocrites, who, looking to and depending solely
upon the circumstances connected with the origin of their race, foolishly boasted that the land
belonged to them by right of inheritance, notwithstanding of their having apostatised from the faith
of their ancestors. Although that land was given to the chosen people to be possessed until the
advent of Christ, we should remember that it was a type of the heavenly inheritance, and that,
therefore, what is here written concerning the protection of the Church, has received a more true
and substantial fulfillment in our own day. There is no reason to fear that the building of the spiritual
temple, in which the celestial power of God has been manifested, will ever fall into ruins.
48John Calvin Comm on Psalms (V3)
