---
layout: calvin-chapter
book_id: psalms
book_name: 诗篇
chapter: 74
total_chapters: 150
header-img: psalm-bg-mountain.jpg
date: 2026-04-30 20:07
---

PSALM 74
The people of God in this psalm bewail the desolate condition of the Church, which was such
that the very name of Israel was almost annihilated. It appears from their humble supplications that
they impute to their own sins all the calamities which they endured; but at the same time they lay
before God his own covenant by which he adopted the race of Abraham as his peculiar people.
Afterwards they call to remembrance how mightily and gloriously he had in the days of old displayed
his power in delivering his Church. Encouraging themselves from this consideration, they beseech
Him that he would at length come to their aid, and remedy a state of matters so deplorable and
desperate.
An instruction of Asaph.
The inscription      , maskil, agrees very well with the subject of the psalm; for although it is
sometimes applied to subjects of a joyful description, as we have seen in the forty-fifth psalm, yet
it generally indicates that the subject treated of is the divine judgments, by which men are compelled
to descend into themselves, and to examine their own sins, that they may humble themselves before
God. It is easy to gather from the contents of the psalm, that its composition cannot be ascribed to
David; for in his time there was no ground for mourning over such a wasted and calamitous condition
of the Church as is here depicted. Those who are of a different opinion allege, that David by the
spirit of prophecy foretold what had not yet come to pass. But as it is probable that there are many
of the psalms which were composed by different authors after the death of David, this psalm, I
have no doubt, is one of their number. What calamity is here spoken of, it is not easy precisely to
determine. On this point there are two opinions. Some suppose that the reference is to that period
of Jewish history when the city and the temple were destroyed, and when the people were carried
away captives to Babylon under king Nebuchadnezzar; 211 and others, that it relates to the period
when the temple was profaned, under Antiochus Epiphanes. There is some plausibility in both these
opinions. From the fact that the faithful here complain of being now without signs and prophets,
the latter opinion would seem the more probable; for it is well known that many prophets flourished
when the people were carried into captivity. On the other hand, when it is said a little before that
the sanctuaries were burnt to ashes, the carved works destroyed, and that nothing remained entire,
these statements do not apply to the cruelty and tyranny of Antiochus. He indeed shamefully polluted
the temple, by introducing into it heathen superstitions; but the building itself continued uninjured,
and the timber and stones were not at that time consumed with fire. Some maintain that by
sanctuaries we are to understand the synagogues in which the Jews were accustomed to hold their
holy assemblies, not only at Jerusalem, but also in the other cities of Judea. It is also a supposable
case, that the faithful beholding the awful desecration of the temple by Antiochus, were led from
so melancholy a spectacle to carry their thoughts back to the time when it was burnt by the
Chaldeans, and that they comprehend the two calamities in one description. Thus the conjecture
211 This is the opinion of Calmet, Poole, Wells, Mant, Walford, and others. “A melancholy occasion,” says Mant, “commemorated
by an elegy of corresponding tenderness and plaintiveness. It would be difficult to name a finer specimen of elegiac poetry than
this pathetic psalm of Asaph.” If it was composed during the Babylonish captivity, and if Asaph, whose name is in the title, was
the author of it, he must have been a different person from David’s contemporary, previously noticed, (volume 2, page 257,
note,) — probably a descendant of the same name and family. Dr Gill thinks that he was the Asaph of the time of David, and
supposes that under the influence of the spirit of prophecy, he might speak of the sufferings of the Church in after ages, just as
David and others testified before-hand of the sufferings of Christ and the glory that should follow.
96John Calvin Comm on Psalms (V3)
will be more probable that these complaints belong to the time of Antiochus; 212 for the Church of
God was then without prophets. If, however, any would rather refer it to the Babylonish captivity,
it will be an easy matter to solve this difficulty; for although Jeremiah, Ezekiel, and Daniel, were
then alive, yet we know that they were silent for a time, as if they had finished the course of their
vocation, until at length Daniel, a little before the day of their deliverance, again came forth for the
purpose of inspiring the poor exiles with courage to return to their own country. To this the prophet
Isaiah seems to have an eye, when he says in the fortieth chapter ( Isaiah 40:1 ) of his prophecies at
the beginning, “Comfort ye, comfort ye my people, will your God say.” The verb, which is there
in the future tense, shows that the prophets were enjoined to hold their peace for a time.
Psalm 74:1-8
1. O God! why hast thou cast us off for ever? why doth thy anger smoke against the flock of
thy pastures? 2. Remember thy congregation, which thou hast possessed of old, the rod of thy
inheritance which thou hast redeemed, this mount Zion on which thou hast dwelt. 3. Lift up thy
strokes to destroy for ever every enemy that worketh mischief to thy sanctuary. 4. Thy adversaries
have roared 213 in the midst of thy sanctuaries; they have set up their signs for signs. 5. He who
lifted up the axes upon the thick trees was renowned as doing an excellent work. 6. And now they
break in pieces the carved work thereof with axes and hammers together. 7. They have set on fire
thy sanctuaries; they have polluted the dwelling-place of thy name, levelling it with the ground.
8. They have said in their heart, Let us destroy them all together: they have burned all the tabernacles
of God in the land.
 
1. O God! why hast thou east us off for ever?  If this complaint was written when the people
were captives in Babylon, although Jeremiah had assigned the 70th year of their captivity as the
period of their deliverance, it is not wonderful that waiting so long was to them a very bitter affliction,
that they daily groaned under it, and that so protracted a period seemed to them like an eternity. As
to those who were persecuted by the cruelty of Antiochus, they might, not without reason, complain
of the wrath of God being perpetual, from their want of information as to any definite time when
this persecution would terminate; and especially when they saw the cruelty of their enemies daily
increasing without any hope of relief, and that their condition was constantly proceeding from bad
to worse. Having been before this greatly reduced by the many disastrous wars, which their neighbors
one after another had waged against them, they were now brought almost to the brink of utter
destruction. It is to be observed, that the faithful, when persecuted by the heathen nations, lifted up
their eyes to God, as if all the evils which they suffered had been inflicted by his hand alone. They
were convinced, that had not God been angry with them, the heathen nations would not have been
permitted to take such license in injuring them. Being persuaded, then, that they were not
encountering merely the opposition of flesh and blood, but that they were afflicted by the just
judgment of God, they direct their thoughts to the true cause of all their calamities, which was, that
God, under whose favor they had formerly lived prosperous and happy, had cast them off, and
212 Rosenmüller is of opinion that this is the period referred to. “For my part,” says Dr Geddes, “I think it must have been
composed during the persecution of Antiochus Epiphanes; and the best commentary on it is the first chapter of the first book of
Maccabees. The author may have been Mattathias.”
213 “Ont rugi comme lions .” — Fr. “Have roared like lions.”
97John Calvin Comm on Psalms (V3)
deigned no longer to account them as his flock. The verb    , zanach, signifies to reject and detest,
and sometimes also to withdraw one’s self to a distance. It is of no great moment in which of these
senses it is here taken. We may consider the amount of what is stated as simply this, that whenever
we are visited with adversities, these are not the arrows of fortune thrown against us at a venture,
but the scourges or rods of God which, in his secret and mysterious providence, he prepares and
makes use of for chastising our sins. Casting off  and anger  must here be referred to the apprehension
or judgment of the flesh. Properly speaking, God is not angry with his elect, whose diseases he
cures by afflictions as it were by medicines; but as the chastisements which we experience powerfully
tend to produce in our minds apprehensions of his wrath, the Holy Spirit, by the word anger,
admonishes the faithful to acknowledge their guilt in the presence of infinite purity. When, therefore,
God executes his vengeance upon us, it is our duty seriously to reflect on what we have deserved,
and to consider, that although He is not subject to the emotions of anger, yet it is not owing to us,
who have grievously offended him by our sins, that his anger is not kindled against us. Moreover,
his people, as a plea for obtaining mercy, flee to the remembrance of the covenant by which they
were adopted to be his children. In calling themselves the flock of God’s pastures, they magnify
his free choice of them by which they were separated from the Gentiles. This they express more
plainly in the following verse.
2. Remember thy congregation, which thou hast possessed of old.214 Here they boast of having
been the peculiar people of God, not on account of any merit of their own, but by the grace of
adoption. They boast in like manner of their antiquity, — that they are not subjects who have come
under the government of God only within a few months ago, but such as had fallen to him by right
of inheritance. The longer the period during which he had continued his love towards the seed of
Abraham, the more fully was their faith confirmed. They declare, therefore, that they had been
God’s people from the beginning, that is, ever since he had entered into an inviolable covenant
with Abraham. There is also added the redemption by which the adoption was ratified; for God did
not only signify by word, but also showed by deed at the time when this redemption was effected,
that he was their King and Protector. These benefits which they had received from God they set
before themselves as an encouragement to their trusting in him, and they recount them before him,
the benefactor who bestowed them, as an argument with him not to forsake the work of his own
hands. Inspired with confidence by the same benefits, they call themselves the rod of his inheritance;
that is to say, the heritage which he had measured out for himself. The allusion is to the custom
which then prevailed of measuring or marking out the boundaries of grounds with poles as with
cords or lines. Some would rather translate the word    , shebet, which we have rendered rod, by
tribe; but I prefer the other translation, taking the meaning to be, that God separated Israel from
the other nations to be his own proper ground, by the secret pre-ordination which originated in his
own good pleasure, as by a measuring rod. In the last place, the temple in which God had promised
to dwell is mentioned; not that his essence was enclosed in that place, — an observation which has
already been frequently made, — but because his people experienced that there he was near at
hand, and present with them by his power and grace. We now clearly perceive whence the people
derived confidence in prayer; it was from God’s free election and promises, and from the sacred
worship which had been set up among them.
214 Archbishop Secker thinks that this verse may be read thus: “Remember thy congregation, which thou hast purchased, hast
redeemed of old; the tribe of thine inheritance; this mount Zion,” etc.
98John Calvin Comm on Psalms (V3)
3. Lift up thy strokes.  Here the people of God, on the other hand, beseech him to inflict a deadly
wound upon their enemies, corresponding to the cruelty with which they had raged against his
sanctuary. They would intimate, that a moderate degree of punishment was not sufficient for such
impious and sacrilegious fury; and that, therefore, those who had shown themselves such violent
enemies of the temple and of the worshippers of God should be completely destroyed, their impiety
being altogether desperate. As the Holy Spirit has dictated this form of prayer, we may infer from
it, in the first place, the infinite love which God bears towards us, when he is pleased to punish so
severely the wrongs inflicted upon us; and, in the second place, the high estimation in which he
holds the worship yielded to his Divine majesty, when he pursues with such rigour those who have
violated it. With respect to the words, some translate      , pheamim, which we have rendered strokes,
by feet or steps,215 and understand the Church as praying that the Lord would lift up his feet, and
run swiftly to strike her enemies. Others translate it hammers,216 which suits very well. I have,
however, no hesitation in following the opinion of those who consider the reference to be to the
act of striking, and that the strokes themselves are denoted. The last clause of the verse is explained
by some as meaning that the enemy had corrupted all things in the sanctuary. 217 But as this
construction is not to be found elsewhere, I would not depart from the received and approved
reading.
4.Thy adversaries have roared in the midst of thy sanctuaries.  Here the people of God compare
their enemies to lions, ( Amos 3:8 ,) to point out the cruelty which they exercised even in the very
sanctuaries of God. 218 In this passage we are to understand the temple of Jerusalem as spoken of
rather than the Jewish synagogues; nor is it any objection to this interpretation that the temple is
here called in the plural number sanctuaries, as is frequently the case in other places, it being so
called because it was divided into three parts. If any, however, think it preferable to consider
synagogues as intended, I would not dispute the point. Yea, without any impropriety, it may be
extended to the whole land, which God had consecrated to himself. But the language is much more
emphatic when we consider the temple as meant. It thus intimates, that the rage of the enemy was
so unbounded and indiscriminate that they did not even spare the temple of God. When it is said,
215 “That       means feet or steps is evident from Psalms 17:5 57:6; and 58:10 Lift up thy feet , advance not slowly or by stealth,
but with large and stately steps, full in the view of all; come to thy sanctuary, so long suffered to lie waste; examine what has
been done there, and let thy grace and aid, hitherto so much withheld, be extended to us.” — Gejer  To lift up the feet is a
Hebraism for “to put one’s self in motion;” “to set out on a journey,” as may be learned from Genesis 29:1 , where of Jacob it is
said, “He lifted up his feet, and went into the east country.” Lifting up the feet is used for going, in the same way as opening the
mouth is for speaking.
216 “There is another notion of    , for a mallet or hammer , Isaiah 41:7  and Kimchi would have that to be the meaning here,     
   , ‘lift up thy mallet,’ in opposition to the ‘axes and hammers,’ verse 6; and thus also Abu Walid, ‘lift up thy dashing instruments.’
And the LXX., who read, ἔπαρον τάς χεῖρας , ‘lift up thy hands,’ come near this.” —  Hammond
217 This is the sense put upon the words by some Jewish interpreters. Thus Abu Walid reads, “Lift up thy dashing instruments,
because of the utter destructions which the enemy hath made, and because of all the evil that he hath done in or on the sanctuary.”
Aben Ezra has, “because of the perpetual desolations,” that is, because of thy inheritance which is laid waste. Piscator takes the
same view: “Betake thyself to Jerusalem, that thou mayest see these perpetual desolations which the Babylonians have wrought.”
In like manner, Gejer, who observes that this sense is preferable to that which considers the words as a prayer, that God would
lift up his feet for the perpetual ruin of the enemy, because the Psalmist has been hitherto occupied with a mere description of
misery, and has used nothing of the language of imprecation. But the Chaldee has, “Lift up thy goings or footsteps, to make
desolate the nations for ever;” that is, Come and spread desolation among those enemies who have invaded and so cruelly reduced
thy sanctuary to ruins.
218 Instead of songs of praise and other acts of devotion, nothing was now heard in the Jewish places of worship but profane
vociferation, and the tumultuous noise of a heathen army. This is with great beauty and effect compared to the roaring of a lion.
99John Calvin Comm on Psalms (V3)
They have set up their signs,219 this serves to show their insulting and contemptuous conduct, that
in erecting their standards they proudly triumphed even over God himself. Some explain this of
magical divinations, 220 even as Ezekiel testifies, ( Ezekiel 21:21, 22 ,) that Nebuchadnezzar sought
counsel from the flight and the voice of birds; but this sense is too restricted. The explanation which
I have given may be viewed as very suitable. Whoever entered into the Holy Land knew that the
worship of God which flourished there was of a special character, and different from that which
was performed in any other part of the world: 221 the temple was a token of the presence of God,
and by it he seemed, as if with banners displayed, to hold that people under his authority and
dominion. With these symbols, which distinguished the chosen tribes from the heathen nations, the
prophet here contrasts the sacrilegious standards which their enemies had brought into the temple.
222 By repeating the word signs twice, he means to aggravate the abominable nature of their act; for
having thrown down the tokens and ensigns of the true service of God, they set up in their stead
strange symbols.
5.He who lifted up the axe upon the thick trees was renowned.  The prophet again aggravates
still more the barbarous and brutal cruelty of the enemies of his countrymen, from the circumstance,
that they savagely demolished an edifice which had been built at such vast expense, which was
embellished with such beauty and magnificence, and finished with so great labor and art. There is
some obscurity in the words; but the sense in which they are almost universally understood is, that
when the temple was about to be built, those who cut and prepared the wood required for it were
in great reputation and renown. Some take the verb     , mebi, in an active sense, and explain the
words as meaning that the persons spoken of were illustrious and well known, as if they had offered
sacrifices to God. The thickness of the trees is set in opposition to the polished beams, to show the
more clearly with what exquisite art the rough and unwrought timber was brought into a form of
the greatest beauty and magnificence. Or the prophet means, what I am inclined to think is the more
correct interpretation, that in the thick forests, where there was vast abundance of wood, great care
was taken in the selection of the trees, that none might be cut down but such as were of the very
best quality. May it not perhaps be understood in this sense, That in these thick forests the trees to
which the axe was to be applied were well known and marked, as being already of great height,
and exposed to the view of beholders? Whatever may be as to this, the prophet, there is no doubt,
in this verse commends the excellence of the material which was selected with such care, and was
so exquisite, that it attracted the gaze and excited the admiration of all who saw it; even as in the
following verse, by the carved or graven work is meant the beauty of the building, which was
finished with unequalled art, But now it is declared, that the Chaldeans, with utter recklessness,
219 Hammond reads, “They set up their ensigns for trophies.” The original word both for ensigns and trophies is    , oth But he
observes that it requires here to be differently translated.    , oth, signifies a sign, and thence a military standard or ensign  The
setting up of this in any place which has been taken by arms, is a token or sign of the victory achieved; and, accordingly, an
ensign or standard thus set up becomes a trophy  To convey, therefore, the distinctive meaning, he contends that it is necessary
in this passage to give different renderings to the same word.
220 That is, they understand signs to mean such signs as diviners or soothsayers were wont to give, by which to foretell things
to come. Jarchi, who adopts this interpretation, gives this sense: That the enemies of God’s people having completed their
conquest according to the auspices or signs of soothsayers, were fully convinced that these signs were real signs; in other words,
that the art of divination was true.
221 “Qu’il y avoit un service divine special et different de ce qui se faisoit ailleurs .” — Fr.
222 “Their own symbols they have set for signs . Profane representations, no doubt, agreeable to their own worship. See 1
Maccabees 1:47 .” — Dr Geddes .
100John Calvin Comm on Psalms (V3)
made havoc with their axes upon this splendid edifice, as if it had been their object to tread under
foot the glory of God by destroying so magnificent a structure. 223
7.They have set fire to thy sanctuaries.  The Psalmist now complains that the temple was burned,
and thus completely razed and destroyed, whereas it was only half demolished by the instruments
of war. Many have supposed that the order of the words has been here inverted, 224 not being able
to perceive how a suitable meaning could be elicited from them, and therefore would resolve them
thus, They have put fire into thy sanctuaries. I have, however, no doubt that the sense which I have
given, although the accent is against it, is the true and natural one, That the temple was levelled
with the ground by being burned. This verse corroborates more fully the statement which I have
made, that the temple is called sanctuaries in the plural number, because it consisted of three parts,
— the innermost sanctuary, the middle sanctuary, and the outer court; for there immediately follows
the expression, The dwelling-place of thy name. The name of God is here employed to teach us that
his essence was not confined to or shut up in the temple, but that he dwelt in it by his power and
operation, that the people might there call upon him with the greater confidence.
8. They have said in their heart, Let us destroy them all together.  To express the more forcibly
the atrocious cruelty of the enemies of the Church, the prophet introduces them speaking together,
and exciting one another to commit devastation without limit or measure. His language implies,
that each of them, as if they had not possessed enough of courage to do mischief, stirred up and
stimulated his fellow to waste and destroy the whole of God’s people, without leaving so much as
one of them. In the close of the verse he asserts that all the synagogues were burned. I readily take
the Hebrew word       , moadim, in the sense of synagogues,225 because he says ALL the sanctuaries,
and speaks expressly of the whole land. It is a frigid explanation which is given by some, that these
enemies, upon finding that they could not hurt or do violence to the sanctuary of God in heaven,
223 In the English Common Prayer-Book the 5th and 6th verses are translated thus: — “He that hewed timber afore out of the
thick trees was known to bring it to an excellent work. But now they break down all the carved work thereof with axes and
hammers.” Dr Nicholls’ paraphrase of this is as follows: “It is well known from the sacred records of our nation to what admirable
beauty the skillful hand of the artificers brought the rough cedar trees, which were cut down by the hatchets of Hiram’s woodmen
in the thick Tyrian forests. But now they tear down all the curious carvings, that cost so much time and exquisite labor, with
axes and hammers, and other rude instruments of iron.” “This is a clear and consistent sense of the passages” says Mant, “and
affords a striking and well imagined contrast.”
224 The order of the words is this,                shilchu baesh mikdashecha , literally, “They have sent into fire thy sanctuary.”
225 It has been objected, that if this psalm was composed at the time of the captivity of the Jews by Nebuchadnezzar, and the
desolation of the Holy Land by the Chaldeans,      , moadey , cannot signify synagogues , because the Jews had no synagogues
for public worship or public instruction till after the Babylonish captivity. Accordingly, Dr Prideaux thinks that the Proseuchae
are meant. These were courts resembling those in which the people prayed at the tabernacle, and afterwards at the temple, built
by those who lived at a distance from Jerusalem, and who were unable at all times to resort thither. They were erected as places
in which the Jews might offer up their daily prayers. “They differed,” says Prideaux, “from synagogues in several particulars.
For, first, In synagogues the prayers were offered up in public forms in common for the whole congregation; but in the Proseuchae
they prayed as in the temple, every one apart for himself. Secondly, The synagogues were covered houses; but the Proseuchae
were open courts, built in the manner of forums, which were open enclosures. Thirdly, Synagogues were all built within the
cities to which they did belong; but the Proseuchae without.” — Connection of the History , etc., Part 1, Book 6, pages 139-141.
Synagogues were afterwards used for the same purpose as the Proseuchae, and hence both come to be designated by the same
name. The same author supposes that those places in the cities of the Levites, and the schools of the prophets, whither the people
resorted for instruction, having been called, as well as the Proseuchae,   -      , moadey-el , are also here intended. “The word      ,
moadey ,” says Dr Adam Clarke, “which we translate synagogues , may be taken in a more general sense, and mean any places
where religious assemblies were held; and that such places and assemblies did exist long before the Babylonish captivity is
pretty evident from different parts of Scripture.” See 2 Kings 4:23 ; Ezekiel 33:31 ; Acts 15:21 . All such places were consumed
to ashes by the hostile invaders whose ravages are bewailed, it having been their purpose to extinguish for ever the Jewish
religion, and, as the most likely means of effecting their object, to destroy every memorial of it.
101John Calvin Comm on Psalms (V3)
turned their rage against the material temple or synagogues. The prophet simply complains that
they were so intent upon blotting out the name of God, that they left not a single corner on which
there was not the mark of the hand of violence. The Hebrew word       , moadim, is commonly taken
for the sanctuary; but when we consider its etymology, it is not inappropriately applied to those
places where the holy assemblies were wont to be held, not only for reading and expounding the
prophets, but also for calling upon the name of God. The wicked, as if the prophet had said, have
done all in their power to extinguish and annihilate the worship of God in Judea.
Psalm 74:9-12
9. We see not our signs: there is no longer a prophet, nor any with us that knoweth how long.
10. How long, O God! shall the adversary reproach? shall the enemy blaspheme thy name for
ever? 11. How long wilt thou withdraw thy hand, and thy right hand? in the midst of thy bosom
consume them. 22612. But God is my King from the beginning, working deliverances in the midst
of the earth.
 
9.We see not our signs.  Here the pious Jews show that their calamities were aggravated from
the circumstance that they had no consolation by which to alleviate them. It is a powerful means
of encouraging the children of God, when he enables them to cherish the hope of his being reconciled
to them, by promising, that even in the midst of his wrath he will remember his mercy. Some limit
the signs here spoken of to the miracles by which God had in the days of old testified, at the very
time when he was afflicting his people, that he would, notwithstanding, still continue to be gracious
to them. But the faithful rather complain that he had removed from them the tokens of his favor,
and had in a manner hidden his face from them. 227 We are overwhelmed with darkness, as if the
prophet had said, because thou, O God! dost not make thy face to shine upon us as thou hast been
accustomed to do. Thus it is common for us to speak of persons giving us signs either of their love
or of their hatred. In short, God’s people here complain not only that the time was cloudy and dark,
but also that they were enveloped in darkness so thick, that there did not appear so much as a single
ray of light. As to be assured by the prophets of future deliverance was one of the chief signs of
God’s favor, they lament that there is no longer a prophet to foresee the end of their calamities.
From this we learn that the office of imparting consolation was committed to the prophets, that
they might lift up the hearts which were cast down with sorrow, by inspiring them with the hope
of Divine mercy. They were, it is true, heralds and witnesses of the wrath of God to drive the
obstinate and rebellious to repentance by threatenings and terrors. But had they merely and without
qualification denounced the vengeance of God, their doctrine, which was appointed and intended
for the salvation of the people, would have only been the means of their destruction. Accordingly,
the foretelling of the issue of calamities while yet hidden in the future, is ascribed to them as a part
of their office; for temporary punishments are the fatherly chastisements of God, and the
226 “We see not any token of thy Divine presence with us.” — Tremellius .
227 The verb, which is,    , kalleh , in Pihel conjugation, is from    , kalah , consumptus est  In Psalm 59:13 , it is twice used,         
   , kalleh bechemah kalleh , “consume them  in wrath, consume them .” Consume , therefore, appears to be a preferable translation
to pluck , which is that of our English version.
102John Calvin Comm on Psalms (V3)
consideration that they are temporary alleviates sorrow; but his continual displeasure causes poor
and wretched sinners to sink into utter despair. If, therefore, we also would find matter for patience
and consolation, when we are under the chastening hand of God, let us learn to fix our eyes on this
moderation on the part of God, by which he encourages us to entertain good hope; and from it let
us rest assured, that although he is angry, yet he ceases not to be a father. The correction which
brings deliverance does not inflict unmitigated grief: the sadness which it produces is mingled with
joy. This end all the prophets endeavored to keep in view in the doctrine which they delivered.
They, no doubt, often make use of very hard and severe language in their dealings with the people,
in order, by inspiring them with terror, to break and subdue their rebellion; but whenever they see
men humbled, they immediately address them in words of consolation, which, however, would be
no consolation at all, were they not encouraged to hope for future deliverance.
The question may here be asked, whether God, with the view of assuaging the sadness arising
from the chastisement, which he inflicted, always determined the number of years and days during
which they would last? To this I answer, that although the prophets have not always marked out
and defined a fixed time, yet they frequently gave the people assurance that deliverance was near
at hand; and, moreover, all of them spoke of the future restoration of the Church. If it is again
objected, that the people in their affliction did wrong in not applying to themselves the general
promises, which it is certain were the common property of all ages, I answer, that as it was God’s
usual way to send in every affliction a messenger to announce the tidings of deliverance, the people,
when at the present time no prophet appeared to be expressly sent for that purpose, not without
cause complain that they were deprived of the signs of the Divine favor which they had been
accustomed to enjoy. Until the coming of Christ it was highly necessary that the memory of the
promised deliverance should be renewed in every age, to show the people of God that to whatever
afflictions they might be subjected, he still continued to care for them, and would afford them
succor.
10. How long, O God! shall the adversary reproach?  Here it is intimated that nothing inflicted
upon them greater anguish than when they saw the name of God blasphemed by the ungodly. By
this manner of praying, the object of the inspired writer was to kindle in our hearts a zeal for
maintaining the Divine glory. We are naturally too delicate and tender for bearing calamities; but
it is a decided proof of genuine godliness, when the contumely which is cast upon God grieves and
disquiets our minds more than all our own personal sufferings. The poor Jews, there can be no
doubt, were assailed with more kinds of reproach than one under a most cruel tyrant, and amongst
a barbarous nation. But the prophet, speaking in the person of the whole Church, makes almost no
account of the reproaches cast upon the people in comparison of the execrable blasphemies directed
against God; according to the statement contained in Psalm 69:9 , “The reproaches of them that
reproached thee are fallen upon me.” The phrase for ever  is again added; for when the ungodly
continue long unpunished, this has a hardening effect, and renders them more audacious, especially
when the revilings which they pour forth against God seem to pass unnoticed by him. It is, therefore,
added immediately after in the 11th verse,
11.How long wilt thou withdraw thy hand?  It is easy to see what the prophet here intends, and
yet interpreters are not agreed as to the words. Some by the word hand, in the first part of the verse,
understand the left hand, to distinguish it from the right hand, mentioned in the last clause of the
verse. But this is mere trifling; for when he uses the term right hand, he simply repeats the same
thing according to his usual manner. Some translate the verb    , kalah, the last word of the verse,
103John Calvin Comm on Psalms (V3)
by hinder or restrain, as if the prophet had said, Do thou at length stretch forth thy hand, which
has been kept too long in thy bosom. But this is a forced sense, to which they have recourse without
any color of reason. Those who translate it consume understand the midst of God’s bosom, as
denoting allegorically his temple, 228 an interpretation of which I cannot approve. It will be better
to continue the interrogation to the last word in this way: “How long wilt thou withdraw thy hand?
Yea, wilt thou withdraw it from the midst of thy bosom? Consume, therefore, these ungodly men
who so proudly despise thee.” We may also not improperly view the words as a prayer that as God’s
enemies persuaded themselves that he was slothful and idle, because he did not bestir himself, nor
openly lift up his hand; he would cause them to feel that he was perfectly able to destroy them with
his nod alone, although he should not move so much as a finger.
12.But God is my King from the beginning.  In this verse, as we have often seen to be the case
in other places, the people of God intermingle meditations with their prayers, thereby to acquire
renewed vigor to their faith, and to stir up themselves to greater earnestness in the duty of prayer.
We know how difficult it is to rise above all doubts, and boldly to persevere in a free and unrestrained
course of prayer. Here, then, the faithful call to remembrance the proofs of God’s mercy and
working, by which he certified, through a continued series of ages, that he was the King and Protector
of the people whom he had chosen. By this example we are taught, that as it is not enough to pray
with the lips unless we also pray in faith, we ought always to remember the benefits by which God
has given a confirmation of his fatherly love towards us, and should regard them as so many
testimonies of his electing love. It is quite clear that the title King, which is here applied to God,
ought not to be restricted merely to his sovereignty. He is addressed by this appellation because he
had taken upon him the government of the Jewish people, in order to preserve and maintain them
in safety. We have already stated what is implied in the words, from the beginning.  By the midst
of the earth  some think that Judea is intended, because it was situated as it were in the midst of the
habitable globe. There is no doubt that it is to be understood of a place which stands prominently
in view. We find the expression used in this sense in these words which God commanded Moses
to speak to Pharaoh,
“And I will sever in that day the land of Goshen, in which my people dwell, that no swarms of
flies shall be there; to the end thou mayest know that I am the Lord in the midst of the earth,”
(Exodus 8:22 .)
The simple and natural meaning, therefore, is, that God had wrought in behalf of the chosen
people many deliverances, which were as open and manifest as if they had been exhibited on a
conspicuous theater.
Psalm 74:13-17
228 “The Jewish Arab reads, ‘Turn not from them thy hand, even thy right hand, but consume them out of the midst of thy
house,’ giving a note, that the house of God is called    .” —  Hammond
104John Calvin Comm on Psalms (V3)
13. Thou hast divided the sea by thy 229 power: thou hast broken the heads of the dragons 230
upon the waters. 14. Thou hast broken the head 231 of Leviathan 232 in pieces, and hast given him
for food to thy people in the wilderness. 15. Thou hast cleaved [or divided] the fountain and the
torrent: thou hast dried up mighty rivers. 16. The day is thine, the night also is thine: thou hast
ordained 233 the light 234 and the sun. 17. Thou hast set [or fixed] all the boundaries of the earth:
thou hast made the summer and the winter.
 
13.Thou hast divided the sea by thy power.  The prophet now collects together certain kinds of
deliverances highly worthy of remembrance; all of them, however, belonging to the first deliverance
by which God emancipated his people from the tyranny of Egypt. We will find him afterwards
descending to the general commendation of the goodness of God which is diffused through the
whole world. Thus from the special grace which God vouchsafes to his Church, he passes on to
speak of the good-will which he displays towards all mankind. In the first place, he says, Thou hast
divided,  or cleaved, the sea. Some think that the following clause is subjoined as an effect of what
is stated in the first clause, — God, by drying up the sea, having caused the whales and other great
fishes to die. I am, however, of opinion, that it is to be taken metaphorically for Pharaoh and his
army; this mode of expression being very common among the prophets, especially when they speak
of the Egyptians, whose country was washed by a sea abounding with fish, and divided by the Nile.
Pharaoh is, therefore, not improperly termed Leviathan,235 on account of the advantages of the sea
229 There is here a change of person, and a transition from the narrative form of speech to the apostrophe, which give animation
to the composition, and enhances its poetical beauty.
230 The word       , thanninim , for dragons , is used by the sacred writers somewhat indeterminately, and translators render it
variously, as by whales, serpents, dragons, crocodiles, and other sea-monsters. (See Genesis 1:21 ; Exodus 7:12 ; Deuteronomy
32:33 ; and Psalm 148:7 .) We cannot now ascertain what particular animal is in each case denoted, and it may very probably be
merely a general term equivalent to our word “monster,” for any strange and prodigious creature.       , thanninim , is here explained
by Williams as denoting “sea-monsters or large serpents.” “What animal is meant by this name,” says Mant, “is not well
ascertained. But it seems to have been some aquatic or amphibious creature commonly known in the neighborhood of Egypt,
but not the crocodile, as that is noticed under a different name in the following verse.” By the dragons the Egyptian people may
be intended.
231 In the Hebrew it is “the heads.”
232 “C’est, le plus grand monstre marin qui soit .” — Fr. marg . “That is, the greatest sea-monster which exists.”
233 “Ou, establi .” — Fr. marg . “Or, established.”
234     , maor , here rendered the light , from    , or, to shine , signifies in general any luminary or receptacle of light; the sun or
the moon indiscriminately. See Genesis 1:16 . But being here joined with and opposed to the sun, as the night is to the day in the
preceding clause, it has been supposed to signify the moon, the luminary of the night, as the sun is that of the day. The Chaldee,
the LXX., the Syriac, and Arabic, render it the moon  The Vulgate has “ auroram ,” “the morning.”
235 Calvin supposes that the whale is the animal here referred to, and this was the opinion for a long time universally held. But
from a comparison of the description given by Job of the Leviathan ( Job 41 ) with what is known of the natural history of the
crocodile, there can be little doubt that the crocodile is the Leviathan of Scripture. This is now very generally agreed upon.
“Almost all the oldest commentators,” says Dr Good, “I may say unconditionally all of them concurred in regarding the whale
as the animal” intended by the Leviathan. “Beza and Diodati were among the first to interpret it ‘the crocodile.’ And Bochart
has since supported this last rendering with a train of argument, which has nearly overwhelmed all opposition, and has brought
almost every commentator over to his opinion.” — DrGood ’s New Translation of Job  “With respect to the Leviathan,” says
Fry, “all are now pretty well agreed that it can apply only to the crocodile, and probably it was nothing but a defective knowledge
of the language of the book of Job, or of the natural history of this stupendous animal, which led former commentators to imagine
the description applicable to any other.” —  Fry’s New Translation and Exposition of the Book of Job  This Egyptian animal, the
crocodile of the Nile, as we have formerly observed, (p. 38, note,) was anciently employed as a symbol of the Egyptian power,
or of their king. Parkhurst remarks that in Scheuchzer’s Physica Sacra  may be seen a medal with Julius Caesar’s head on one
side, and on the reverse a crocodile with this inscription, — Ægypte Capta , Egypt Taken. This strengthens the conclusion that
the crocodile is the animal intended by the name Leviathan. Both the etymology of the name Leviathan, and to what language
105John Calvin Comm on Psalms (V3)
possessed by his country, and because, in reigning over that land with great splendor, he might be
compared to a whale moving up and down at its ease in the midst of the waters of the mighty ocean.
236 As God put forth his power at that time for the deliverance of the people, to assure the Church
that he would always be her protector and the guardian of her welfare, the encouragement afforded
by this example ought not to be limited exclusively to one age. It is, therefore, with good reason
applied to the descendants of that ancient race, that they might improve it as a means of confirming
and establishing their faith. The prophet does not here recount all the miracles which God had
wrought at the departure of the people from the land of Egypt; but in adverting to some of them,
he comprehends by the figure synecdoche, all that Moses has narrated concerning them at greater
length. When he says that leviathan was given for food to the Israelites, and that even in the
wilderness, 237 there is a beautiful allusion to the destruction of Pharaoh and his host. It is as if he
had said, that then a bountiful provision of victuals was laid up for the nourishment of the people;
for when their enemies were destroyed, the quiet and security which the people in consequence
enjoyed served, so to speak, as food to prolong their life. By the wilderness, is not meant the
countries lying on the sea coast, though they are dry and barren, but the deserts at a great distance
from the sea. The same subject is prosecuted in the following verse, where it is declared, that the
fountain was cleaved or divided, that is, it was so when God caused a stream of water to gush from
the rock to supply the wants of the people. 238 Finally, it is added, that mighty rivers239 were dried
up, an event which happened when God caused the waters of the Jordan to turn back to make a
way for his people to pass over. Some would have the Hebrew word     , ethan, which signifies
it belongs, according to Simonis, are unknown. But according to Gesenius it signifies “properly the twisted animal.” It is affirmed
by the Arabic lexicographers quoted by Bochart, ( Phaleg  Lib. 1, cap. 15,) that Pharaoh in the Egyptian language signified a
crocodile; and if so, there may be some such allusion to his name in this passage, and in Ezekiel 29:3 , and 32:2, where the king
of Egypt is represented by the same animal, as was made to the name of Draco, when Herodicus (in a sarcasm recorded by
Aristotle, Rhet Lib. 2, cap. 23) said that his laws, — which were very severe, — were the laws οὐκ ἀνθρώπου ἀλλὰ δράκοντος ,
non hominis sed draconis . — Merrick ’s Annotations  “Theheads of Leviathan” may denote the princes of Egypt, or the leaders
of the Egyptian armies.
236 “Regnoit en grand triomphe, comme la balene se pourmene a sou aise au milieu de ce grande amas d’eaux .” — Fr.
237 Calvin reads, “thy people in the wilderness.” But thy has nothing to represent it in the original, which literally is, “to a
people, to those of the wilderness.” Those who adopt this rendering are not agreed as to what is to be understood by the expression.
Some think it means the birds and beasts of prey, who devoured the dead bodies of Pharaoh and the Egyptian army, when cast
upon the coast of the Red Sea by the tides. See Exodus 14:30 . If such is the meaning, these birds and beasts of prey are called
“the people of wilderness,” as being its principal inhabitants. That   , am, people , is sometimes to be thus interpreted in Scripture
is evident from Proverbs 30:25, 26 , where both the ants and the conies are styled a people  But as the desert on the coast of which
the Egyptians were thrown up was inhabited by tribes of people who lived on fishes — even on those of the largest kind, which
they found cast upon the shore by the tides — and were from thence called Ιχθυοφάγοι , or fish-eaters ; some interpreters suppose
that these are “the people of the wilderness” here mentioned; and that as Pharaoh and his host are represented under the figure
of the Leviathan and other monsters of the deep, so these people, in allusion to their common way of living, are figuratively said
to have preyed on their dead bodies, by which is understood their enriching themselves with their spoils.
238 “Quand Dieu feit que de la roche saillit un cours d’eau pour la necessite du peuple .” — Fr.
239 It is rivers in the plural, from which it would appear that the Jordan was not the only river which was dried up, to give an
easy passage to the Israelites. The Chaldee specifies the Arnon, the Jabbok, and the Jordan, as the rivers here referred to. With
respect to the Jordan, see Joshua 3:16 . As to the miraculous drying up either of the Arnon or the Jabbok, we have no distinct
account in Scripture. But in Numbers 21 , after it is mentioned, verse 13 , that the Israelites “pitched on the other side of Arnon,”
it follows, verses 14, 15 , “Wherefore, it is said in the book of the wars of the Lord, What he did in the Red Sea, and in the brooks
of Arnon, and at the stream of the brooks that goeth down to the dwelling of Ar, and lieth upon the border of Moab.” From this
it would appear that God wrought at “the brooks of Arnon, and at the stream of the brooks that goeth down to the dwelling of
Ar,” miracles similar to that which was wrought at the Red Sea, when it was divided to open up a passage for the chosen tribes.
106John Calvin Comm on Psalms (V3)
mighty, to be a proper name, as if the correct translation were rivers of Ethan; but this interpretation
is altogether without foundation.
16. The day is thine, the night also is thine.  The prophet now descends to the consideration of
the divine benefits which are extended in common to all mankind. Having commenced with the
special blessings by which God manifested himself to be the Father of his chosen people, he now
aptly declares that God exercises his beneficence towards the whole human family. He teaches us,
that it is not by chance that the days and nights succeed each other in regular succession, but that
this order was established by the appointment of God. The secondary cause of these phenomena is
added, being that arrangement by which God has invested the sun with the power and office of
illuminating the earth; for after having spoken of the light he adds the sun, as the principal means
of communicating it, and, so to speak, the chariot in which it is brought when it comes to show
itself to men. 240 As then the incomparable goodness of God towards the human race clearly shines
forth in this beautiful arrangement, the prophet justly derives from it an argument for strengthening
and establishing his trust in God.
17.Thou hast fixed241 all the boundaries of the earth.  What is here stated concerning the
boundaries or limits assigned to the earth, and concerning the regular and successive recurrence of
summer and winter every year, is to the same effect as the preceding verse. It is doubtful whether
the prophet means the uttermost ends of the world, or whether he speaks of the particular boundaries
by which countries are separate from each other. Although the latter are often disturbed by the
violence of men, whose insatiable cupidity and ambition cannot be restrained by any of the lines
of demarcation which exist in the world, but are always endeavoring to break through them; 242 yet
God manifests his singular goodness in assigning to each nation its own territory upon which to
dwell. I am, however, rather of opinion, that the clause is to be understood of those bounds which
cannot be confounded at the will of men, and consider the meaning to be, that God has allotted to
men as much space of earth as he has seen to be sufficient for them to dwell upon. Farther, the well
regulated successions of summer and winter clearly indicate with what care and benignity God has
provided for the necessities of the human family. From this, the prophet justly concludes, that
nothing is more improbable than that God should neglect to act the part of a father towards his own
flock and household.
Psalm 74:18-23
18. Remember this: the adversary hath blasphemed Jehovah: and a worthless people hath done
despite to thy name. 19. Give not to the beast the soul of thy turtle dove: forget not the congregation
of thy poor ones for ever. 20. Have regard to thy covenant: for the dark places of the earth are full
of the habitations of violence. 21. Let not him who is oppressed [or afflicted] return ashamed: let
the poor and needy one praise thy name. 22. Arise, O God! Plead thy cause: remember thy reproach,
240 “Comme le principal instrument d’icelle, et par maniere de dire, le chariot auquel elle est apportee, quand elle se vient
monstrer aux hommes .” — Fr.
241 The original word implies “to settle, to place steadily in a certain situation or place.” See Parkhurst ’s Lexicon on    
242 “Entant que leur cupidite et ambition insatiable ne pent estre retenue par quelque separation qu’il y ait, mais tasche tousjours
d’enjamber par dessus .” — Fr.
107John Calvin Comm on Psalms (V3)
which is done to thee by the foolish man daily. 23. Forget not the voice of thy adversaries: the
tumult of those who rise up against thee ascendeth continually.
 
18. Remember this.  The prophet having encouraged the hearts of the godly by magnifying the
divine power and goodness, now returns to the prosecution of his prayer. He first complains that
the enemies of his people revile God, and yet continue unpunished. When he says, Remember this,
the manner of expression is emphatic; and the occasion demanded it, for it is not a crime of small
magnitude to treat with contumely the sacred name of God. For the sake of contrast, he states that
it was a worthless or foolish people who thus presumed insolently to pour forth their reproaches
against God. The Hebrew word    , nabal, denotes not only a foolish man, but also a wicked and
infamous person. The prophet, therefore, justly describes the despisers of God as people who are
vile and worthless.
19.Give not to the beast the soul of thy turtle dove.  The Hebrew word    , chayath, which we
translate beast, signifies sometimes the soul or life, and so some explain it in the second clause of
this verse, where it again occurs. But it is here unquestionably to be taken either for a wild beast
or for a multitude. Understood in either of these ways, this form of expression will contain a very
apposite comparison between the life of a weak and timorous bird, and a powerful army of men,
or a cruel beast. The Church is compared to a turtle dove243 for, although the faithful consisted of
a considerable number, yet so far were they from matching their enemies, that, on the contrary,
they were exposed to them as a prey. It is next added, Forget not the soul or congregation of thy
poor ones  The Hebrew word    , chayath, is again employed, and there is an elegance when, on
account of its ambiguity, it is used twice in the same verse, but in different senses. I have preferred
translating it congregation, rather than soul, because the passage seems to be a prayer that it would
please God to watch over and defend his own small flock from the mighty hosts of their enemies.
20. Have regard to thy covenant.  That God may be the more inclined to show mercy, the prophet
brings to his remembrance the Divine covenant; even as the refuge of the saints, when they have
found themselves involved in extreme dangers, has always been to hope for deliverance, because
God had promised, in the covenant which he made with them, to be a father to then, From this we
243As none of the ancient versions have “turtle dove,” and as the reading of the LXX. is, ἐξομολογουμένην σοι, confessing
thee, it has been thought by some in a high degree probable that the word     , torecha , thy turtle dove in our present Hebrew
copies, should be     , todecha , confessing thee ; an error which transcribers might easily have committed, by writing  , resh,
instead of  , daleth  Houbigant, who approves of this opinion, boldly pronounces the other, which represents the people of God
under the figure of a turtle dove , to be “ putidum et aliunde conquisitum .” But, says Archbishop Secker, “ Turtle dove , which
Houbigant calls putidum , should not be called so, considering that,      , Cant. 2, 14 , is the same thing.” The passage, as it now
stands, agrees with other texts of Scripture which represent the people of God under the image of a bird, Numbers 24:21 ; Jeremiah
22:23; 48:28 . The turtle dove is a defenceless, solitary, timid, and mournful creature, equally destitute of skill and courage to
defend itself from the rapacious birds of prey which thirst for its blood. And this gives a very apt and affecting representation
of the state of the Church when this psalm was written. She was in a weak, helpless, and sorrowful condition, in danger of being
speedily devoured by the inveterate and implacable enemies, who, like birds of prey, were besetting her on all sides, eagerly
intent upon her destruction. “With the most plaintive earnestness she pleads her cause with the Almighty, through this and the
following verses; continually growing more importunate in her petitions as the danger increases. While speaking, she seems in
the last verse to hear the tumultuous clamours of the approaching enemy growing every minute louder as they advance; and we
leave the ‘turtle dove’ without the Divine assistance, ready to sink under the talons of the rapacious eagle.” — Mant
“The Psalmist’s expression, thy turtle dove , may perhaps be farther illustrated from the custom, ancient and modern, of
keeping doves as favourite birds, (see Theocritus, 5. 96; and Virgil, Eclog . 3, 5, 68, 69,) and from the care taken to secure them
from such animals as are dangerous to them.” — Merrick ’s Annotations .
108John Calvin Comm on Psalms (V3)
learn, that the only firm support on which our prayers can rest is, that God has adopted us to be his
people by his free choice. Whence, also, it appears how devilish was the phrensy of that filthy dog
Servetus, who was not ashamed to affirm that it is foolish, and gross mockery, to lay before God
his own promises when we are engaged in prayer. Farther, the godly Jews again show us how
severely they were afflicted, when they declare that violence and oppression were everywhere
prevalent; as if all places were the haunts of cut-throats and the dens of robbers. 244 It is said the
dark places of the earth;  for, whenever God seems to hide his face, the wicked imagine that whatever
wickedness they may commit, they will find, wherever they may be, hiding-places by which to
cover it all.
21. Let not him who is oppressed return with shame.  The word return, as it has a reference to
God, is equivalent to the expression, to go away empty. The faithful, then, beseech Him that they
may not be put to shame by suffering a repulse at his hands. They call themselves afflicted, poor,
and needy, as an argument to obtain the Divine favor and mercy. It is, however, to be observed,
that they do not speak insincerely, nor give an exaggerated representation of their distresses, but
intimate, that by so many calamities they were brought to such a low condition, that there no longer
remained for them any quarter in the world from which they could expect any help. By this example,
we are taught that when we are reduced to the greatest extremity, there is a remedy always ready
for our misery, in calling upon God.
22.Arise, O God! plead thy cause.  The pious Jews again supplicate God to ascend into his
judgment-seat. He is then said to arise, when, after having long exercised forbearance, he shows,
in very deed, that he has not forgotten his office as judge. To induce him to undertake this cause
the more readily, they call upon him to maintain his own right. Lord, as if they had said, since the
matter in hand is what peculiarly concerns thyself; it is not time for thee to remain inactive. They
declare, at the same time, how this was, in a special sense, the cause of God. It was so, because the
foolish people daily cast reproaches upon him. We may here again translate the word    , nabal, the
worthless people, instead of the foolish people. The wickedness charged against the persons spoken
of is aggravated from the circumstance, that, not content with reproaching God on one occasion,
they continued their derision and mockery without intermission. For this reason, the faithful conclude
by invoking God that he would not forget such heaven-daring conduct in men who not only had
the audacity to reproach his majesty, but who fiercely and outrageously poured forth their
blasphemies against him. They seemed, it is true, to do this indirectly; but, as they despised God,
it is asserted that they rose up against him with reckless and infatuated presumption, after the
manner of the Giants of old, and that their haughtiness was carried to the greatest excess.
244 “The caves, dens, woods, etc., of the land, are full of robbers, cut-throats, and murderers, who are continually destroying
thy people; so that the holy seed seems as if it would be entirely cut off, and the covenant promise thus rendered void.” — Dr
Adam Clarke . “For the dark places of the earth , i.e., the caverns of Judea, are full of the habitations of violence , i.e., of men
who live by rapine. Some, however, by the dark places of the earth , understand the seat of the captivity of the Jews.” — Cresswell .
109John Calvin Comm on Psalms (V3)
