---
layout: calvin-chapter
book_id: psalms
book_name: 诗篇
chapter: 82
total_chapters: 150
header-img: psalm-bg-mountain.jpg
date: 2026-04-30 20:07
---

PSALM 82
As kings, and such as are invested with authority, through the blindness which is produced by
pride, generally take to themselves a boundless liberty of action, the Psalmist warns them that they
must render an account at the bar of the Supreme Judge, who is exalted above the highest of this
world. After he has reminded them of their duty and condition, perceiving that he speaks to such
as refuse to receive admonition, he calls upon God to vindicate his character as a righteous judge.
421
A Psalm of Asaph.
Psalm 82:1-4
1. God sitteth in the assembly of God: he will judge in the midst of the gods. 4222. How long
will ye judge unjustly? and accept the persons of the wicked? Selah. 3. Determine the cause of the
poor and the orphan; justify 423 the helpless and the destitute. 4. Rescue the poor and the afflicted:
deliver them out of the hand of the wicked.
 
1God sitteth in the assembly of God.424 It is unquestionably a very unbecoming thing for those
whom God has been pleased to invest with the government of mankind for the common good, not
to acknowledge the end for which they have been exalted above others, nor yet by whose blessing
they have been placed in so elevated a station; but instead of doing this, contemning every principle
of equity, to rule just as their own unbridled passions dictate. So infatuated are they by their own
splendor and magnificence, as to imagine that the whole world was made only for them. Besides,
they think that it would derogate from their elevated rank were they to be governed by moderate
counsels; and although their own folly is more than enough to urge them on in their reckless career,
they, notwithstanding, seek for flatterers to soothe and applaud them in their vices. To correct this
arrogance, the psalm opens by asserting, that although men occupy thrones and judgment-seats,
God nevertheless continues to hold the office of supreme ruler. God has made even a heathen and
licentious poet bear testimony to this truth in the following lines: —
421 Kimchi thinks it probable that this psalm was written in the days of Jehoshaphat, and refers to 2 Chronicles 19:5-7 , as
indicating the time and occasion of its composition. We are there informed that Jehoshaphat; “set judges in the land, throughout
all the fenced cities of Judah, city by city;” and in instructing them with regard to their duty, he uses nearly the same words as
those in the beginning of this psalm. Dr Morison takes a different view. “This psalm,” says he, “was composed in all probability
in the days of Hezekiah, in reference to certain wicked magistrates, ( 2 Chronicles 29:30 ,) who had grievously perverted the
administration of justice, who were guilty of great oppression, and who had done much to introduce a state of general national
corruption. King Jehoshaphat had reformed several public abuses which had crept into the judicatories of Israel in his time, ( 2
Chronicles 19:7 ,) but before the reign of Hezekiah, things had reverted to their former unhappy condition; so that a public national
reformation was loudly demanded. The psalm contains an exhortation to the judges of Israel, and a reproof for their negligence
and oppression.”
422 “Ou, il jugeras au milieu les dieux .” — Fr. marg . “Or, he will judge in the midst the gods.”
423 “C’est, faites justice .” — Fr. marg . “That is, do justice to.”
424 Horsley translates the first verse thus: —
“God standeth in the assembly;
God, in the midst of the gods, giveth sentence.”
On which he has the following note: — “In what assembly? The assembly of his holy angels. The Psalmist, I think, poetically
imagines the celestial court assembled for the business of this review of the proceedings of the earth’s judges, and God, in the
midst of his angels, taxing their iniquity, and awarding their punishment.”
197John Calvin Comm on Psalms (V3)
“Regum timendorum in proprios greges,
Reges in ipsos imperium est Jovis,
Clari giganteo triumpho,
Cuncta supercilio moventis .”
Horatii, Carm. Liber in Ode i.
“Kings rule their subject flocks; great Jove
O’er kings themselves his reign extends,
Who hurl’d the rebel giants from above;
At whose majestic nod all nature bends.”
Boscawen’s Translation.
That the potentates of this world may not arrogate to themselves more than belongs to them,
the prophet here erects a throne for God, from which he judges them all, and represses their pride;
a thing which is highly necessary. They may, indeed, admit that they owe their elevation to royal
power to the favor of God, and they may worship him by outward ceremonies, but their greatness
so infatuates them that they are chargeable with expelling and casting him to a distance from their
assembly, by their vain imaginations; for they cannot bear to be subject to reason and laws. Thus
the design of the prophet was to deride the madness by which the princes of this world are bewitched,
in leaving God no place in their assembly. The more effectually to overthrow this irrational
self-confidence with which they are intoxicated, civil order is termed the assembly of God; for
although the divine glory shines forth in every part of the world, yet when lawful government
flourishes among men, it is reflected therefrom with pre-eminent lustre. I indeed grant that it is
quite common for the Hebrews to adorn with the title of God whatever is rare and excellent. But
here it would appear, from the scope of the passage, that this name of the Divine Being is applied
to those who occupy the exalted station of princes, in which there is afforded a peculiar manifestation
of the majesty of God; even as Solomon, in Proverbs 2:17 , calls marriage “the covenant of God,”
from the peculiar sanctity by which that relation is distinguished.
In the second clause of the verse, it is not material whether we read, He will judge in the midst
of the gods, or, He will judge the gods in the midst.  The first construction, however, is the most
easy and natural, That however much the rulers of the world may exalt themselves, they cannot in
the least impair the authority of God, by divesting him of his sovereignty over them and of the
government of all things, which he will ever retain as his inalienable prerogative. But here, as also
a little after, the name gods is to be understood of judges, on whom God has impressed special
marks of his glory. To apply it to angels is a fancy too strained to admit of serious consideration.
2How long will ye judge unjustly?  Many suppose that God is here introduced speaking, and
that these are the words which he utters from his throne of judgment. But I would rather consider
the prophet himself as the speaker, who, in order to prepare the way for administering a rebuke,
had spoken in the manner in which he did in the first verse. Kings may lift up their heads above
the clouds, but they, as well as the rest of mankind, are under the government of God; and such
being the case, it is in vain for them arrogantly to struggle to obtain exemption from the obligations
of reason. Yet this is what they do. Although tyrants are amongst the basest of men, and occupy
their exalted station by detestable treason, yet if any servant of God has the fortitude to open his
mouth against them, they immediately attempt to shelter themselves by appealing to the sacred
name of God, as if great wrong had been done to them. Thus, whilst they persuade themselves that
they are privileged with exemption from the law to which the rest of mankind are subject, they
198John Calvin Comm on Psalms (V3)
endeavor to deprive the common people of divine truth and its ministers. In short, they think that
there can be no sovereignty unless where uncontrolled license is enjoyed. But let this principle be
once established, “That God rules among them,” and then a way is opened up for the admission of
divine truth. Accordingly, the prophet, after having thus laid a foundation for his authority, freely
inveighs against princes, and reproves the very gross vice of selling themselves to those who
unrighteously oppress the poor, and of being gained by bribes to pervert in their administration
every principle of justice. He expressly names the wicked; for good men will never attempt to
corrupt judges. Moreover, there is a certain devilish frenzy which infatuates the princes of the
world, and leads them voluntarily to pay greater respect to wicked men than to the simple and
innocent. Even supposing that the wicked continue inactive, and use no endeavors to obtain for
themselves favor either by flattery, fraud, bribery, or other artifices; yet those who bear rule are for
the most part inclined of themselves to the bad side. The reason why the prophet upbraids them is,
that wicked men find more favor at their hands than the good and conscientious.
3 Determine the cause of the poor and the orphan.  We are here briefly taught that a just and
well-regulated government will be distinguished for maintaining the rights of the poor and afflicted.
By the figure synecdoche, one part of equitable administration is put for the whole; for it cannot
be doubted that rulers are bound to observe justice towards all men without distinction. But the
prophet, with much propriety, represents them as appointed to be the defenders of the miserable
and oppressed, both because such persons stand in need of the assistance of others, and because
they can only obtain this where rulers are free from avarice, ambition, and other vices. The end,
therefore, for which judges bear the sword is to restrain the wicked, and thus to prevent violence
from prevailing among men, who are so much disposed to become disorderly and outrageous.
According as men increase in strength, they become proportionally audacious in oppressing the
weak; and hence it is that rich men seldom resort to magistrates for help, except when they happen
to fall out among themselves. From these remarks, it is very obvious why the cause of the poor and
needy is here chiefly commended to rulers; for those who are exposed an easy prey to the cruelty
and wrongs of the rich have no less need of the assistance and protection of magistrates than the
sick have of the aid of the physician. Were the truth deeply fixed in the minds of kings and other
judges, that they are appointed to be the guardians of the poor, and that a special part of this duty
lies in resisting the wrongs which are done to them, and in repressing all unrighteous violence,
perfect righteousness would become triumphant through the whole world. Whoever thinks it not
beneath him to defend the poor, instead of allowing himself to be carried hither and thither by favor,
will have a regard only to what is right. We may farther learn from this passage, that although
magistrates may not be solicited for succor, they are accounted guilty before God of negligence, if
they do not, of their own accord, succor those who stand in need of their interference. When iniquity
openly prevails, and when, on account of it, sighs and lamentations are everywhere heard, it is in
vain for them to pretend that they cannot redress wrongs, unless complaints are addressed to them.
Oppression utters a sufficiently loud cry of itself; and if the judge, sitting on a high watch-tower,
seems to take no notice of it, he is here plainly warned, that such connivance shall not escape with
impunity.
199John Calvin Comm on Psalms (V3)
Psalm 82:5-8
5. They know not, neither do they understand: they walk in darkness, although all the
foundations of the earth are moved. 6. I have said, Ye are gods, and all of you sons of the Most
High. 7. But ye shall die as a man; and ye shall fall, O princes: as one of the people. 8. Arise, O
God! Judge the earth: for thou shalt inherit all nations.
 
5They know not, neither do they understand.425 After having reminded princes of their duty,
the Psalmist complains that his admonition from their infatuation is ineffectual, and that they refuse
to receive wholesome instruction; yea, that although the whole world is shaken to its foundations,
they, notwithstanding, continue thoughtless and secure in the neglect of their duty. He chiefly
reprobates and condemns their madness as manifested in this, that although they see heaven and
earth involved in confusion, they are no more affected at the sight than if the care of the interests
of mankind did not belong to them, of which they are, notwithstanding, in an especial manner the
chosen and appointed conservators. I have stated a little before, that what chiefly deprives them of
understanding is, that, being dazzled with their own splendor, and perversely shaking off every
yoke, no religious considerations have the effect of inclining them to moderation. All sound
knowledge and wisdom must commence with yielding to God the honor which is his due, and
submitting to be restrained and governed by his word. The last clause of the verse, Although all
the foundations of the earth are moved,426 is almost universally understood by interpreters in a
different sense from that in which I have rendered it. They explain it as implying, that of all the
calamities in the world the greatest is when princes neglect to execute the duties of their office; for
it is the observance and prevalence of justice which constitutes the foundation on which the fabric
of human society rests. Thus the sense, according to them, is, that the world is undermined and
overthrown by the unjust tyranny of princes. I am far from rejecting this interpretation; but, as I
have already hinted, I am more inclined to think, that we have here condemned the monstrous
stupidity of judges, who can remain indifferent and unmoved in beholding the horrible confusion
of civil society, yea even the very earth shaken to its foundations.
6I have said, ye are gods.  God has invested judges with a sacred character and title. This the
prophet concedes; but he, at the same time, shows that this will afford no support and protection
to wicked judges. He does not introduce them as speaking of the dignity of their office; but
anticipating the style of reasoning which they would be disposed to adopt, he replies, “If you appeal
to your dignity as an argument to shield you, this boasting will avail you nothing; yea, rather you
are deceiving yourselves by your foolish confidence; for God, in appointing you his substitutes,
has not divested himself of his own sovereignty as supreme ruler. Again, he would have you to
remember your own frailty as a means of stirring you up to execute with fear and trembling the
office intrusted to you.” This verse may also be viewed as addressed by God himself to rulers, and
as intimating, that, in addition to his clothing them with authority, he has bestowed upon them his
425 “The Psalmist having thus far addressed himself to the administrators of justice, as if wearied with his ineffectual
remonstrance, here suddenly turns away and condemns their inattention and perverseness. The change of person is a natural
indication of the earnestness of the speaker, and has a lively effect.” —  Mant .
426 “All the foundations of the earth , etc. Rather, of the land ; that is, truth and justice, the foundation of all good government,
and the only security of a state, are now altogether violated or disregarded.” — Warner .
200John Calvin Comm on Psalms (V3)
name. This interpretation seems to agree with the language of Christ in John 10:34 , where he speaks
of those as called gods to whom the word of God came. The passage, however, may be appropriately
resolved thus: I grant that ye are gods, and the sons of the Most High427 But this does not materially
alter the meaning. The object is simply to teach that the dignity with which judges are invested can
form no excuse or plea why they should escape the punishment which their wickedness deserves.
The government of the world has been committed to them upon the distinct understanding that they
themselves also must one day appear at the judgment-seat of heaven to render up an account. The
dignity, therefore, with which they are clothed is only temporary, and will pass away with the
fashion of the world. Accordingly, it is added in the 7th verse, But ye shall die as men. You are
armed with power, as if he had said, to govern the world; but you have not on that account ceased
to be men, so as to be no longer subject to mortality. The last clause of the verse is translated by
some expositors, Ye shall fall like one of the princes;428 but in my opinion improperly. They think
that it contains a threatening of the violent death which would befall these unrighteous judges,
corresponding to the sentiment of these lines of a heathen poet: —
“Ad generum Cereris sine caede et sanguine pauci,
Descendunt reges, et sicca morte tyranni .”
“Few kings and tyrants go down to Pluto, the son-in-law of Ceres, without being put to a violent
death, before they have completed the ordinary term allotted to the life of mortal man.” 429 That
translation being forced, and not such as the words naturally suggest, I have no doubt that princes
are here compared to the obscure and common class of mankind. The word one signifies any of
the common people. Forgetting themselves to be men, the great ones of the earth may flatter
themselves with visionary hopes of immortality; but they are here taught that they will be compelled
to encounter death as well as other men. Christ, with the view of rebutting the calumny with which
the Pharisees loaded him, quoted this text, John 10:34, 35 , “Jesus answered them, Is it not written
in your law, I said, Ye are gods? If he called them gods, unto whom the word of God came, and
the Scripture cannot be broken; say ye of him whom the Father hath sanctified and sent into the
world, Thou blasphemest; because I said, I am the Son of God?” By these words Christ did not
mean to place himself among the order of judges; but he argues from the less to the greater, that if
the name of God is applied to God’s officers, it with much more propriety belongs to his only
begotten Son, who is the express image of the Father, in whom the Father’s majesty shines forth,
and in whom the whole fullness of the Godhead dwells.
8Arise, O God! judge the earth.  The reason why this psalm concludes with a prayer has been
already stated at the commencement. The prophet, finding that his admonitions and remonstrances
were ineffectual, and that princes, inflated with pride, treated with contempt all instruction on the
principles of equity, addresses himself to God, and calls upon Him to repress their insolence. By
427 “Ye are all the children of the Most High , an Hebrew idiom, signifying men of the highest rank and power. Comp. Psalm
29:1; 89:7 .” — Cresswell .
428 This is the reading in our English Bible, on which Archbishop Secker remarks, “It seems needless to say that these princes
shall fall like one of the princes.” He thinks with Bishop Hare that the true reading is not      , hassarim , the princes , as in our
present copies, but      , harsaim , the poor  The translation, however, given by Calvin, who takes       in the vocative case, Oye
princes ! and who, after the word     , cheachad , for as one of , supplies the people , makes any alteration of the text unnecessary.
Gataker also considers      , to be in the vocative case, which is approved by Horsley, Berlin, and others. Dathe takes       in the
sense of tyrants , but brings no authority to prove that the word has this sense. Le Clerc, in the latter part of the verse, after like
one of , supplies the many , reading, “And fall, O ye princes! like one of the many.”
429 This is the translation given of these lines in the French version.
201John Calvin Comm on Psalms (V3)
this means, the Holy Spirit furnishes us with ground of comfort whenever we are cruelly treated
by tyrants. We may perceive no power on earth to restrain their excesses; but it becomes us to lift
up our eyes to heaven, and to seek redress from Him whose office it is to judge the world, and who
does not claim this office to himself in vain. It is therefore our bounden duty to beseech him to
restore to order what is embroiled in confusion. The reason of this which immediately follows —
for thou shalt inherit all nations  — is understood by some as a prophecy concerning the kingdom
of Christ, by whom God has brought all nations in subjection to himself. But it is to be viewed in
a more extensive sense, as implying that God has a rightful claim to the obedience of all nations,
and that tyrants are chargeable with wickedly and unjustly wresting from him his prerogative of
bearing rule, when they set at nought his authority, and confound good and evil, right and wrong.
We ought therefore to beseech him to restore to order the confusions of the world, and thus to
recover the rightful dominion which he has over it.
202John Calvin Comm on Psalms (V3)
