---
layout: calvin-chapter
book_id: psalms
book_name: 诗篇
chapter: 83
total_chapters: 150
header-img: psalm-bg-mountain.jpg
date: 2026-04-30 20:07
---

PSALM 83
The prophet implores the divine aid against the enemies of the Church, and, as an argument for
obtaining this the more easily, he enumerates the many nations which had conspired together for
the express purpose of exterminating the people of Israel, and thereby extinguishing the very name
of the Church of God. To stir up himself and others to greater earnestness and confidence in prayer,
he shows, by many examples, how mightily God had been wont to succor his servants.
A Song or Psalm of Asaph.
Psalm 83:1-4
1. O God! keep not silence with thyself; hold not thy peace, and be not still, O God! 2. For,
behold! Thy enemies are tumultuous: and those who hate thee have lifted up the head. 3. They
have formed a crafty design against thy people, and have consulted against thy hidden ones. 4.
They have said, Come and let us cut them off from being a nation; and let the name of Israel be
no more remembered.
 
1O God! hold not thy peace.  It is very generally agreed among commentators, that this psalm
was composed during the reign of king Jehoshaphat; and in this opinion I readily concur. That
godly king, as is well known, had to engage in dreadful wars against multiplied hosts of enemies.
Although the Ammonites and Moabites were the originators of the principal war in which he was
engaged, yet they mustered forces not only from Syria, but also from distant countries, and the
troops thus brought together well nigh overwhelmed Judea with their multitude. It would then
appear, from the long list of enemies, here enumerated, who had conspired together to destroy the
people of God, that the conjecture is well-founded which refers the composition of this psalm to
that occasion; 430 and sacred history informs us, that one of the Levites, under the influence of the
Spirit of prophecy, gave the king assurance of victory, 431 and that the Levites sang before the Lord.
In the midst of so great dangers, the whole nation, as well as the holy king, must have been involved
in the deepest distress; and, accordingly, we have here a prayer full of earnestness and solicitude.
These feelings prompted the repetition of the words which occur in the very opening of the psalm,
Hold not thy peace, Keep not silence, be not still  By this, the faithful would intimate, that if God
intended to succor them, it behoved him to make haste, else the opportunity for doing so would be
lost. It is unquestionably our duty to wait patiently when God at any time delays his help; but, in
condescension to our infirmity, he permits us to supplicate him to make haste. What I have rendered,
keep not silence with thyself, is literally keep not silence to thyself, which some translate by the
paraphrase, Hold not thy peace in thy own cause, — an exposition which is too refined to be more
particularly noticed. This form of expression is equivalent to saying, Hold not thyself in. Perhaps
the particle is here superfluous, as it is in many other places.
2For, behold! thy enemies are tumultuous.  As an argument for enforcing the prayer of the
preceding verse, it is affirmed that the faithful are oppressed both by the impetuous violence and
430 Compare the 6th, 7th, and 8th verses of the psalm with 2 Chronicles 20:1, 10, 22 ; and the 12th verse of the psalm with the
11th verse of that chapter.
431 The name of this Levite was Jahaziel, and he is expressly said to be a prophet of the race of Asaph, 2 Chronicles 20:14 . It
is not unlikely that he is the same with Asaph, the author of this psalm.
203John Calvin Comm on Psalms (V3)
the crafty policy of their enemies, which, to all human appearance, rendered their escape from death
utterly hopeless. When it is said that they are tumultuous  and lift up the head, the meaning is, that
relying upon their own power, they behave themselves insolently and proudly. By this conduct on
the part of their enemies, the minds of the people of God are greatly depressed, and the only way
in which they can obtain relief, is by making their moan to Him whose continual work it is to repress
the proud. When, therefore, the saints implore his aid, it is their ordinary course to lay before him
the perverseness of their enemies. It is worthy of notice, that those who molest the Church are called
the enemies of God.
It affords us no small ground of confidence that those who are our enemies are also God’s
enemies. This is one of the fruits of his free and gracious covenant, in which he has promised to
be an enemy to all our enemies, — a promise for which there is good cause, when it is considered
that the welfare of his people, whom he has taken under his protection, cannot be assailed without
an injury being, at the same the done to his own majesty. Meanwhile, let us live at peace with all
men, as much as in us lies, and let us endeavor to practice uprightness in our whole deportment,
that we may be able confidently to appeal to God, that when we suffer at the hands of men, we
suffer wrongfully. The pride and violent assaults of our enemies may be combined with craftiness.
But when such is the case, it becomes us to yield to God the honor which belongs to him, by resting
satisfied that He can succor us; for to break the proud who foam out their rage, and to take the
crafty in their own craftiness, is work which He has been accustomed to perform in all ages. To
keep us from thinking that we are abandoned to the snares and traps of our enemies, the prophet
here seasonably sets before us a consideration calculated to administer the highest consolation and
hope, when he calls us God’s hidden ones  This expression is understood by some as meaning that
the aid and protection which God extends to us, is not apparent to the eye of sense and reason; just
as it is said elsewhere of the life of the people of God, that it is hid, (Colossians 3:3 .) But this
interpretation is too forced, and altogether inconsistent both with the scope of the passage and the
natural construction of the words. The design of them is simply to teach that we are hidden under
the shadow of God’s wings; for although to outward appearance we lie open, and are exposed to
the will of the wicked and the proud, we are preserved by the hidden power of God. 432 Accordingly,
it is said in another Psalm, (27:5,)
“In the time of trouble he shall hide me in his pavilion: in the secret of his tabernacle shall he
hide me.” ( Psalm 27:5 )
It is, however, at the same time to be observed, that none are hid under the keeping and protection
of God but those who, renouncing all dependence on their own strength, betake themselves with
fear and trembling to Him. Such as under the influence of a flattering belief in the sufficiency of
their own strength to resist, boldly enter the conflict, and, as if devoid of all fear, wax wanton, will
ultimately suffer the consequences which result from inadequate resources. 433 We will then best
432 The Hebrew word translated thy hidden ones , primarily means a treasure , and is so taken in Psalm 17:14 . Accordingly, it
is here rendered by Mudge, and French and Skinner, “thy treasured ones:” that is, thy peculiar people: those whom thou hast
hitherto protected and kept in perfect safety, as in a place of security and secrecy. The Septuagint reads, κατὰ τῶν ἁγίων σου,
“against thy saints.” The word is also sometimes put for the sanctuary, as in Ezekiel 7:22 . Some therefore think that the temple,
and the treasures contained in it, are intended.
433 “Ils sentiront a la fin a leur grande honte, qu’ils estoyent desnuer de toute vertu .” — Fr. “Will at length find, to their great
shame, that they were destitute of all power.”
204John Calvin Comm on Psalms (V3)
consult our own safety by taking shelter under the shadow of the Almighty, and, conscious of our
own weakness, committing our salvation to him, casting it, so to speak, into his bosom.
4They have said, Come and let us cut them off from being a nation.  The wickedness of these
hostile powers is aggravated from the circumstance, that it was their determined purpose utterly to
exterminate the Church. This may be restricted to the Ammonites and Moabites, who were as
bellows to blow up the flame in the rest. But the Hagarenes, the Syrians, and the other nations,
being by their instigation affected with no less hatred and fury against the people of God, for whose
destruction they had taken up arms, we may justly consider this vaunting language as uttered by
the whole of the combined host; for having entered into a mutual compact they rushed forward
with rival eagerness, and encouraged one another to destroy the kingdom of Judah. The prime agent
in exciting such cruel hatred was doubtless Satan, who has all along from the beginning been
exerting himself to extinguish the Church of God, and who, for this purpose, has never ceased to
stir up his own children to outrage. The phrase, to cut them off from being a nation, signifies to
exterminate them root and branch, and thus to put an end to them as a nation or people. That this
is the meaning is more clearly evinced from the second clause of the verse, Let the name of Israel
be no more remembered  The compassion of God would in no small degree be excited by the
circumstance that this war was not undertaken, as wars commonly have been, to bring them, when
conquered, under the power of their enemies; but the object which the cruelty of their enemies
aimed at was their entire destruction. And what did this amount to but to an attempt to overthrow
the decree of God on which the perpetual duration of the Church depends.
Psalm 83:5-8
5. For they have consulted with the heart together; they have entered into a covenant 434 against
thee. 6. The tents of Edom, 435 and the Ishmaelites 436 Moab 437 and the Hagarenes. 4387. Gebal, 439
434 The Hebrew is            , berith yichrothu , “they have cut a covenant.” The verb is from    , carath , he cut , which, with the
noun,     , berith , signifies to strike a league , or to covenant  The phrase owes its origin to the custom which prevailed, in ancient
times, of sacrificing an animal at the forming of solemn leagues, and dividing the victim in twain, the contracting parties passing
between the two pieces; see volume 2, page 264, note.  It is then affirmed of these combined enemies of the Jews, that they had
cut the covenant sacrifice ; that they had slain a sacrificial victim, divided it in twain, and passed between the pieces’ thus mutually
binding themselves to accomplish their hostile purpose.
435 That is, the Edomites, the descendants of Esau, ( Genesis 25:30 .) They were a pastoral people, and made great use of tents.
436 The Ishmaelites were the descendants of Ishmael, Abraham’s son, by Hagar the Egyptian, ( Genesis 25:12-18 .) They inhabited
part of Arabia.
437 That is, the Moabites, the descendants of Moab, a son of Lot, by one of his daughters, ( Genesis 19:37 .)
438 The Hagarenes or Hagarites were the posterity of Abraham by Keturah, (who is supposed to have been Hagar,) whom he
married after Sarah’s death. They dwelt on the east of Gilead, in the vicinity of the Euphrates. In the days of Saul war was made
upon them by the Reubenites, who, after having nearly destroyed them and expelled them from their country, dwelt in their tents,
(1 Chronicles 5:10 .) They seem again to have recruited their strength; but where they afterwards dwelt is not known. “They are
probably the same,” says Cresswell, “as the Saracens.”
439 Gebal, which signifies a mountain, denotes, according to some, the Giblites, who inhabited a district on the Phoenician
coast in the neighborhood of Tyre. They were a tribe of the Aborigines of Canaan, and are mentioned as left by Joshua to be
conquered after his death, ( Joshua 13:5 .) They were of considerable service to Hiram, king of Tyre, in preparing materials for
Solomon’s temple, as we learn from 1 Kings 5:18 , where the original word for stone-squarers is       haggibelim , the Giblites ;
and it would seem from Ezekiel’s speaking of “the ancients of Gebal and the wise men thereof,” ( Ezekiel 27:9 ,) that they rose
to no small degree of eminence. The ruins of an ancient city called by the natives Gibyle, situated upon the Mediterranean Sea
205John Calvin Comm on Psalms (V3)
and Ammon, 440 and Amalek 441 the Philistines with the inhabitants of Tyre. 8. Assur is also
associated with them: they have been an arm to the sons of Lot. Selah.
 
5 For they have consulted with the heart together.  The multiplied hosts which united their
powers together to oppose the Church of God and to effect her overthrow, are here enumerated.
As so many nations, formed into one powerful confederacy, were bent on the destruction of a
kingdom not greatly distinguished by its power, the miraculous aid of God was indispensably
necessary for the deliverance of a people who, in such extremity, were altogether unable to defend
themselves. In circumstances apparently as hopeless good king Asa gave utterance to that truly
magnanimous reflection:
“Lord, it is nothing with thee to help whether with many, or with them that have no power: help
us, O Lord our God! for we rest on thee, and in thy name we go against this multitudes”
(1 Chronicles 14:11 .)
The same Spirit who inspired that pious king with such invincible fortitude dictated this psalm
for the benefit of the whole Church, to encourage her with unhesitating confidence to betake herself
to God for aid. And in our own day he sets before us these words, in order that no danger or difficulty
may prevent us from calling upon God. When the whole world may conspire together against us,
we have as it were a wall of brass for the defense of Christ’s kingdom in these words, “Why do the
heathen rage?” etc., ( Psalm 2:1 .)
It will be in no small degree profitable to us to contemplate this as an example in which we
have represented to us, as in a mirror what has been the lot of the Church of God from the beginning.
This, if rightly reflected upon, will keep us at the present day from being unduly dejected when we
witness the whole world in array against us. We see how the Pope has inflamed the whole world
against us with diabolical rage. Hence it is, that in whatever direction we turn our eyes, we meet
with just so many hostile armies to destroy us. But when we have once arrived at a settled persuasion
that no strange thing happens to us, the contemplation of the condition of the Church in old time
will strengthen us for continuing in the exercise of patience until God suddenly display his power,
which is perfectly able, without any created aid, to frustrate all the attempts of the world.
To remove from the minds of the godly all misgivings as to whether help is ready to be imparted
to them from heaven, the prophet distinctly affirms that those who molest the Church are chargeable
with making war against God, who has taken her under his protection. The principle upon which
God declares that he will be our helper is contained in these words,
“He that toucheth you, toucheth the apple of mine eye,”
(Zechariah 2:8 .)
And what is said in another psalm concerning the patriarchs, is equally applicable to all true
believers,
“Touch not mine anointed, and do my prophets no harm,”
between Tripoli and Sidon, are supposed to be those of the chief city of the Giblites. If so, these ruins attest its ancient grandeur
to have been considerable. Others suppose that Gebal (the Gebalene of the Romans) was a mountainous district inhabited by the
Edomites, and extending from the Dead Sea southward to Selal or Petra. By the Arabs it is called Djebal.
440 That is, the Ammonites, the descendants of Ammon, another of Lot’s sons, by one of his daughters, ( Genesis 19:38 .) They
dwelt in Arabia Petrea.
441 The Amalekites were a powerful people, who dwelt also in Arabia Petrea, between the Dead Sea and the Red Sea, or between
Havilah and Shur, ( 1 Samuel 15:7 ,) south of Idumea, and east of the northern part of the Red Sea.
206John Calvin Comm on Psalms (V3)
(Psalm 105:15 .)
He will have the anointing with which he has anointed us to be, as it were, a buckler to keep
us in perfect safety. The nations here enumerated did not avowedly make war against him; but as,
when he sees his servants unrighteously assaulted, he interposes himself between them and their
enemies to bear the blows aimed at them, they are here justly represented as having entered into a
league against God  The case is analogous to that of the Papists in the present day. If any were to
ask them, when they hold consultations for the express purpose of accomplishing our destruction,
Whether they were stronger than God? they would immediately reply, That they had no intention
whatever of assaulting heaven in imitation of the giants of old. But God having declared that every
injury which is done to us is an assault upon him, we may, as from a watch-tower, behold in the
distance by the eye of faith the approach of that destruction of which the votaries of Antichrist shall
have at length the sad and melancholy experience.
The expression, to consult with the heart, is by some explained, to deliberate with the greatest
exertion and earnestness of mind. Thus it is quite common for us to say, that a thing is done with
the heart which is done with earnestness and ardor of mind. But this expression is rather intended
to denote the hidden crafty devices complained of a little before.
Some interpreters refer the tents of Edom to warlike furniture, and understand the words as
meaning, that these enemies came well equipped and provided with tents for prolonging the war;
but the allusion seems rather to be to the custom which prevailed among those nations of dwelling
in tents. It is, however, a hyperbolical form of expression; as if it had been said, So great was their
eagerness to engage in this war, that they might be said even to pluck their tents from the places
where they were pitched.
I do not intend to enter curiously into a discussion concerning the respective nations here named,
the greater part of them being familiarly known from the frequency with which they are spoken of
in the sacred Scriptures. When it is said that Assur and the rest were an arm to the sons of Lot,  this
is evidently an additional aggravation of the wickedness of the sons of Lot. It would have been an
act of unnatural cruelty for them to have aided foreign nations against their own kindred. But when
they themselves are the first to sound the trumpet, and when of their own suggestion they invite
the aid of the Assyrians and other nations to destroy their own brethren, ought not such barbarous
inhumanity to call forth the deepest detestation? Josephus himself records, that the Israelites had
passed through their borders without doing them any harm, sparing their own blood according to
the express command of God. When the Moabites and Ammonites then knew that their brethren
the Jews spared them, remembering that they were of the same blood, and sprung from one common
parentage, ought they not also to have reciprocated so much kindness on their part as not to have
embarked in any hostile enterprise against them? But it is, as it were, the destiny of the Church,
not only to be assailed by external enemies, but to suffer far greater trouble at the hands of false
brethren. At the present day, none are more furiously mad against us than counterfeit Christians.
Psalm 83:9-12
207John Calvin Comm on Psalms (V3)
9. Do to them as to the Midianites, 442 as to Sisera, as to Jabin, at the brook Kishon. 44310. They
perished at Endor; they became manure for the earth. 11. Make them and their princes like Oreb,
and like Zeeb; 444 and like Zebah, and like Zalmunna, 445 all their princes. 12. Who have said, Let
us take in possession for ourselves the habitations of God.
 
9.Do to them as to the Midianites.  The faithful, having complained of the very grievous
oppressions to which they were subjected, with the view of inducing God the more readily to succor
them, now call to their remembrance the many occasions on which he had afforded relief to his
people, when brought into the most desperate circumstances. From this, it is an obvious inference,
that God wisely delays his aid to his servants under oppression, that when they seem to be reduced
to the last extremity, he may appear in a miraculous manner for their succor. The prophet, in this
verse, mingles together two histories. Strict accuracy would have required him to have said in one
connected sentence, Do to them as to the Midianites at the brook Kishon.  But he inserts in the
middle of this sentence, the slaughter of Jabin and Sisera. It was, however, of no great importance
to distinguish particularly between the two histories. He considered it enough for his purpose, to
bring to the remembrance of himself and other pious Jews, the miracles which God in the days of
old had so often wrought in delivering his people. The great object aimed at is to show, that God,
who had so often put his enemies to flight, and rescued his poor trembling sheep out of the jaws
of wolves, was not now without the power of effecting the same deliverance. The wonderful manner
in which he succoured his people by the hand of Gideon is well known: Judges 6  and 7; It might
have seemed altogether ridiculous for Gideon to venture to engage in battle against a very powerful
army, with no greater a number of men of war than three hundred, and these, be it observed, such
as had been in a state of bondage during their whole lives, and whom the mere look of their lords
might have thrown into consternation. And yet, it came to pass, that the Midianites perished by
turning their swords against each other. The same goodness God displayed in the slaughter of Sisera
and king Jabin, Judges 4:13 . Barak, under the conduct of a woman, Deborah, discomfited them
both, when, with a small handful of soldiers, he intrepidly gave battle to their mighty host. And
Sisera, the general of the army, did not die bravely on the field of battle, but was smitten by the
hand of a woman after he had retired to some hiding-place. That the faithful may not be overwhelmed
with terror and fall into despair, they seasonably fortify themselves with these examples of
deliverance, by which God had shown that in himself alone there resides a sufficiency of power to
defend his people, whenever, destitute of the resources of human aid, they should betake themselves
to him. From that astonishing and unwonted mode of granting deliverance, they came to the
conclusion, that he is a wonderful worker in preserving his Church; in order to encourage themselves
to entertain the fullest confidence, that in his breath alone they would have sufficient strength to
overthrow all their enemies. Nor is it only in this passage that the slaughter of the Midianites is
related for this purpose. Isaiah also ( Isaiah 9:4 ) introduces it for confirming the truth of the Church’s
442 The Midianites derive their name from Midian, the son of Abraham, by Keturah, Genesis 25:2 . The history here referred
to is the complete defeat of that people by Gideon, Judges 7:21, 23 .
443 Kishon  is a torrent which flows from mount Tabor into the sea.
444 Oreb and Zeeb  were two chiefs or generals of the Midianites, and were slain by the men of Ephraim in their pursuit of the
Midianites, Judges 7:24, 25 .
445 Zebah and Zalmunna  were kings of Midian, whom Gideon, after having defeated their army, took prisoners and put to
death, Judges 8:10-21 .
208John Calvin Comm on Psalms (V3)
restitution: “For thou hast broken the yoke of his burden, and the staff of his shoulder, the rod of
his oppressor, as in the day of Midian.” When it is stated that they became manure for the earth,
the expression may be explained as meaning, either, first, that their carcases lay rotting upon the
earth; or, secondly, that they were trampled under foot as manure. This latter exposition is the most
appropriate; but I do not reject the former. The reason why it is said, They perished at Endor,  it is
somewhat difficult to ascertain. The name, Endor, is to be found in Joshua 17:11 ; and it is probable,
that the army of king Jabin was destroyed there. 446 The opinion entertained by some, that Endor
is here used as an appellative, conveying the idea that their discomfiture was open and visible to
the eye, is what I cannot approve.
12.Who have said, Let us take in possession for ourselves the habitations of God.  These heathen
enemies are again accused of treason against the King of heaven, in seizing upon his heritage like
lawless robbers. They would not, we may be sure, avow in so many words that it was their intention
to commit such a crime; but as they despised God, who, as they well knew, was worshipped by the
people of Israel, they are here justly charged with the guilt of endeavoring to dispossess Him of
his own inheritance. And, without doubt, they profanely poured abuse upon the true God, of whose
sacred majesty they entertained the greatest contempt, their minds being besotted with their own
inventions. But even granting that they abstained from gross blasphemies, yet whatever harassing
proceedings are carried on against the godly redound to the dishonor of God, who has taken them
under his protection. The appellation, the habitations or mansions of God, which is applied to Judea,
is a form of expression, containing no small degree of comfort. God has united himself to us, with
the view of having an everlasting residence amongst us, or rather that he may set as high a value
upon his Church, and account it as precious, as a householder does his possessions which are most
valuable, and yield him a large revenue.
Psalm 83:13-18
446 Endor is not mentioned in the account given of the discomfiture of Jabin’s host, and the slaughter of Sisera, in Judges 4 ;
but it appears from Joshua 17:11 , which Calvin quotes, to have been a part of the portion which fell to the tribe of Manasseh. In
that passage, Taanach and Megiddo are mentioned as districts adjoining to Endor. And in the song of Deborah, the kings of
Canaan who fought on the occasion referred to, against the Israelites, are said to have fought “in Taanach by the waters of
Megiddo,” Judges 5:19 . This may explain why they are said to have perished at Endor, which was near the place where Sisera’s
army were destroyed.
209John Calvin Comm on Psalms (V3)
13. O my God! make them like a whirling ball, 447 like stubble before the wind. 14. As fire
burns a forest 448 and as the flame kindles the mountains, 44915. So pursue them with thy tempest,
450 and terrify them with thy whirlwind. 16. Fill their faces with shame; that they may seek thy
name, O Jehovah! 17. Let them be ashamed, and terrified perpetually, and let them be confounded,
and perish. 18. And let them know that thou art, thy name Jehovah, thou alone the Most High over
all the earth. 451
 
13.O my God! make them like a whirling ball.  As the ungodly, when they gird and prepare
themselves for destroying the Church, are usually inflated with intolerable pride, the inspired bard
beseeches God to put them to shame, it being impossible to abate their pride until they are laid
prostrate, confounded, and shamefully disappointed. When he declares (verse 16) that, as the result
of this, they will seek the name of God, he is not to be understood as speaking of their being brought
to true repentance, or of their genuine conversion. I indeed admit that the first step to genuine
repentance is when men, brought low by affliction, willingly humble themselves. But what is here
meant is nothing more than a forced and slavish submission like that of Pharaoh, king of Egypt. It
is a case of frequent occurrence for the wicked, when subdued by adversity, to give glory to God,
for a short period. But they are soon again carried away with a frantic madness, which clearly
discovers their hypocrisy, and brings to light the pride and rebellion which lurked in their hearts.
What the prophet desires is, that the wicked may be compelled by stripes to acknowledge God,
whether they will or no, in order that their fury, which breaks forth because they escape with
impunity, may at least be kept under restraint. This is more clearly apparent from the 17th verse,
where he distinctly prays that they may be destroyed for ever; which would not at all correspond
with his previous statement, were it regarded as a prayer for their being brought to repentance. Nor
does he needlessly heap together such a multiplicity of words. He does this partly because the
reprobate, though often chastised, are nevertheless so incorrigible that ever and anon they are
mustering up new strength and courage; and partly because there is nothing which it is more difficult
to be persuaded of than that such as wallow at ease in great outward prosperity will soon perish.
447 “Globum ,” — Lat “Une boule ,” — FrThe word     , galeggal , thus translated, is interpreted by Lowth, “any light thing
whirled by the wind, chaff, thistle-down, etc.” “      seems here,” says Archbishop Secker, “especially on comparing Isaiah 17:13 ,
to be not a wheel, but some light matter, which the wind whirls round and blows away; chaff .” In that passage of Isaiah, where
the same Hebrew word occurs, the rendering in our English Bible is “a rolling thing;” and the marginal reading, “thistle-down.”
This verse affords a striking exhibition of the nothingness of combined nations before the Almighty. He can make them “like
the thistle-down; like the stubble before the wind.”
448 The allusion in this verse is to the fires, either accidental or designed, which frequently occur in hot and wooded countries,
and which spread to a vast extent, devouring all before them, and continuing their ravages for a long time. Many Eastern and
African travelers describe these formidable and alarming fires from personal observation; and such descriptions serve to give a
more adequate idea than would otherwise offer itself to an European mind of the Psalmist’s meaning. This language is an
expressive image for wide and quick destruction.
449 “Kindleth the mountains , that is, the produce of the mountains, trees, plants, etc.” — Walford .
450 “Pursue them with thy tempest , is an evident reference to the dissipation of the chaff , and what follows relates clearly to
the expansion of the flame .” — Note of Henley, in Lowth ’s Sacred Poetry of the Hebrews , volume 1, page 277.
451 “The construction of the words in the close of the psalm lies most probably thus,      , and they shall know , ie., it shall be
known by this means,                 , thou art thy name Jehovah , ie., that thou art what thy name Jehovah imports ; and what that is,
is expounded in the remainder of the verse,            , thou only the Most High over all the earth ; that being indeed the meaning of
Jehovah , the infinite, eternal, and so the only supreme power over all the world.” — Hammond
210John Calvin Comm on Psalms (V3)
The cause to which this is to be attributed is just our not sufficiently apprehending the dreadful
character of the vengeance of God which awaits the oppressors of the Church.
18.And let them know that thou art, thy name Jehovah.  It is not the saving knowledge of God
which is here spoken of, but that acknowledgement of him which his irresistible power extorts from
the wicked. It is not simply said that they will know that there is a God; but a special kind of
knowledge is laid down, it being intimated that the heathen who before held the true religion in
contempt, would at length perceive that the God who made himself known in the Law, and who
was worshipped in Judea, was the only true God. Still, however, it must be remembered, that the
knowledge spoken of is only that which is of an evanescent character, having neither root nor the
living juice to nourish it; for the wicked will not submit to God willingly and cordially, but are
drawn by compulsion to yield a counterfeit obedience, or, being restrained by him, dare not break
forth into open outrage. This, then, is an experimental recognition of God which penetrates not to
the heart, but is extorted from them by force and necessity. The pronoun    , atah, thou, is emphatic,
implying a tacit contrast between the God of Israel and all the false gods which were the product
of men’s invention. The prayer amounts to this: Lord, make them to know that the idols which they
have fabricated for themselves are no gods, and in fact are nothing. The despisers of God may
indeed shun the light, and at one time may overcast themselves with clouds, while at another their
may plunge into the deep and thick shades of darkness; but He pursues them, and draws them forth
to the knowledge of himself, which they would fain bury in ignorance. And as the world
indiscriminately and disgracefully applies his sacred name to its own trifling inventions, this
profanation is corrected when it is added, thy name Jehovah. This implies that being, or really to
be, is in the strict sense applicable to God alone; for although unbelievers may attempt to tear his
glory to pieces, he continues perfect and unchanged. The contrast of which I have spoken, must be
kept in mind by the reader. A nation has never existed so barbarous as not to have worshipped some
deity; but every country forged particular gods for itself. And although the Moabites, the Edomites,
and the rest of these nations, admitted that some power and authority belonged to the God of Israel,
yet they conceived that this power and authority did not extend beyond the boundaries of Judea.
Thus the king of Syria called him, “the God of the hills,” ( 1 Kings 20:23 .) This preposterous and
absurd division of God’s glory, which men make, is disproved by one word, and all the superstitions
which at that time prevailed in the world are overthrown, when the Prophet attributes to the God
of Israel, as well the essence of Deity as the name; for unless all the idols of the heathen are
completely abolished, he will not obtain, alone and unshared, the name of Jehovah. Accordingly,
it is added, Thou alone art the Most High over all the earth; a statement which is worthy of our
most careful attention. The superstitious commonly think it enough to leave God his name, that is
to say, two or three syllables; and in the meantime they fritter away his power, as if his majesty
were contained in an empty title. Let us then remember that God does not receive that honor among
men to which he is entitled, if he is not allowed to possess his own inherent sovereignty, and if his
glory is obscured by setting up other objects against him with antagonist claims.
211John Calvin Comm on Psalms (V3)
