---
layout: calvin-chapter
book_id: psalms
book_name: 诗篇
chapter: 84
total_chapters: 150
header-img: psalm-bg-mountain.jpg
date: 2026-04-30 20:07
---

PSALM 84
The Psalmist complains that nothing proved to him a source of greater distress than his being
prevented from coming to the tabernacle, and his being banished from the assembly of the saints,
where God was called upon. And yet he shows, that nothing can withstand the longing desires of
the godly; and that, surmounting all obstacles, they will be constantly engaged in seeking God,
and, so to speak, will make a way for themselves where there is none. 452 At length he expresses
his desire to be restored to the tabernacle of God, and again testifies that a day spent in the tabernacle
was in his estimation more to be prized 453 than to live for a long time in the society of unbelievers.
To the chief musician upon Gittith. A Psalm of 454 the sons of Korah. 455
The title of this psalm does not bear the name of David; but as its subject-matter is applicable
to him, he was in all probability its author. Some think that it was composed by the sons of Korah,
for his particular use; but to prove the groundlessness of this opinion, it is only necessary to advert
to this one consideration, that David in his time was so eminently distinguished by the gift of
prophecy as to be under no necessity of employing the Levites to perform a service for which he
himself was so well qualified. The only difficulty to our ascribing it to David is, that mention is
made of mount Zion, to which the ark of the covenant was not brought until he was put in peaceable
possession of the kingdom. how after that, he was never deprived of the liberty of appearing before
the ark with others, except once, and then only for a short time; namely, when he was under the
necessity of betaking himself to flight on account of the rebellion raised against him by his son
Absalom. 456 The contents of the psalm, however, indicate, that at the time of its composition, he
had been compelled to wander long in different places as an exile. If we reflect that David recorded
in psalms the persecutions he endured under Saul long after he was delivered from them, we will
not be surprised to find him making mention of Zion in connection with them. Of the word Gittith,
I have already spoken on the eighth psalm.
Psalm 84:1-4
1. How amiable are thy tabernacles, O Jehovah of Hosts! 2. My soul longeth, [or greatly
desireth,] yea, even fainteth after the courts of Jehovah: my heart and my flesh leap for joy towards
452 “Mais au contraire que par dessus tous empeschemens ils poursuyvront constamment a chercher Dieu, et par maniere de
dire, se feront voye la ou il n’y en a point .” — Fr.
453 “Il tesmoigne derechef qu’il estime plus de jouyer de ceste liberte d’assister avec les autres au tabernacle de Dieu, quand
mesme il ne devroit vivre qu’un jour, etc .” — Fr. “He again testifies, that to enjoy the liberty of assisting with others at the
tabernacle of God for only one day was, in his estimation, more to be prized, etc.”
454 “It is admitted that the Hebrew preposition here used ( lamed ) may be translated either by, to, or for. When applied to an
individual, we consider it as marking the author by whom it was written, or the musician to whose care it was addressed, for
adapting it to music. But when addressed to a company of choristers, as the sons of Korah, there seems no doubt but it was
intended for them to sing it.” — Williams .
455 The sons of Korah were the descendants of Korah, whom the earth swallowed up for striving against Moses and against
the Lord. In the narrative of that event, we are informed that “the children of Korah died not,” ( Numbers 26:10 .) They joined
not with their father in his sedition, and therefore escaped his punishment. It appears from 1 Chronicles 9:19 , and 26:1-19 , that
their posterity were employed as porters or keepers of the tabernacle and temple. They had also a place among the singers of
the temple, ( 2 Chronicles 20:19 .) Their name occurs in the title of nine psalms.
456 “Or est-il, que depuis ce temps-la, il ne perdit jamais la liberte de pouvoir comparoistre devant l’Arche avec les autres, si
non une fois et pour bien peu de temps, c’est ascavoir quand il s’enfuit pour la persecution que luy faisoit son fils .” — Fr.
212John Calvin Comm on Psalms (V3)
the living God. 3. The sparrow also hath found a house for herself, and the swallow 457 a nest for
herself, where she may place her young ones, O thine altars! Thou Jehovah of Hosts! my King,
and my God. 4. Blessed are they who dwell in thy house: they will be ever praising thee. Selah.
 
1How amiable are thy tabernacles, O Jehovah of Hosts!  David complains of his being deprived
of liberty of access to the Church of God, there to make a profession of his faith, to improve in
godliness, and to engage in the divine worship. Some would understand by the tabernacles of God,
the kingdom of heaven, as if David mourned over his continuance in this state of earthly pilgrimage;
but they do not sufficiently consider the nature of his present afflicted circumstances — that he
was debarred from the sanctuary. He knew that God had not in vain appointed the holy assemblies,
and that the godly have need of such helps so long as they are sojourners in this world. He was also
deeply sensible of his own infirmity; nor was he ignorant how far short he came of approaching
the perfection of angels. He had therefore good ground to lament over his being deprived of those
means, the utility of which is well known to all true believers. His attention was, no doubt, directed
to the proper end for which the external ritual was appointed; for his character was widely different
from that of hypocrites, who, while they frequent the solemn assemblies with great pomp, and seem
to burn with ardent zeal in serving God, yet in all this, aim at nothing more than by an ostentatious
display of piety to obtain the credit of having performed their duty towards Him. David’s mind
was far from being occupied with this gross imagination. The end he had in view in desiring so
earnestly to enjoy free access to the sanctuary was, that he might there worship God with sincerity
of heart, and in a spiritual manner. The opening words are in the form of an exclamation, which is
an indication of ardent affection; and this state of feeling is expressed still more fully in the second
verse. Hence we learn, that those are sadly deficient in understanding who carelessly neglect God’s
instituted worship, as if they were able to mount up to heaven by their own unaided efforts.
I have observed, that in the second verse a more than ordinary ardor of desire is expressed. The
first verb,    , casaph, signifies vehemently to desire; but not contented with this word, David adds,
that his soul fainteth after the courts of the Lord, which is equivalent to our pining away, when,
under the influence of extreme mental emotion, we are in a manner transported out of ourselves.
He speaks only of the courts of the tabernacle, because, not being a priest, it was not lawful for
him to go beyond the outer court. None but the priests, as is well known, were permitted to enter
into the inner sanctuary. In the close of the verse, he declares, that this longing extended itself even
457 Bochart supposes     , to signify not the swallow , but some kind of wild dove ; as he observes, that the Æthiopic version
renders it the ring-dove , and the Septuagint, Vulgate, Chaldee, Syriac, and other ancient versions, the turtle  These last probably
render it turtle from the resemblance of the name to    , tur, the common name of that bird. Merrick, in his version, translated it
at first turtle , but afterwards substituted the more comprehensive name of dove instead of turtle, at the suggestion of Dr Lowth.
“You have very good authorities for the turtle ,” says that learned Prelate: “my objection may be merely an English one. The
bird which we know by that name is of all others the most retired and shyest; and hardly ever approaches any building, much
less makes her nest in any frequented place. Does not this consideration render it an unfit image for the Psalmist’s purpose here?
The dove , which is only a more general name for the same bird, would not be liable to this objection.” But to remove that difficulty
relating to the turtle, Merrick quotes a passage from Sir H. Blunt’s Voyage to the Levant, (page 186, ed. 5) in which that traveler
says, that in Turkey, all birds are so tame from not being used to violence, that he had thrown his coat upon turtle-doves in the
highway. “The Hebrew interpreters,” says the Illustrated Commentary upon the Bible, “believe it is the swallow, and are followed
by our version. The word means freedom , deliverance , and may be supposed to refer to the free manner in which the swallow
flies. It is only mentioned again, at least by this name, in Proverbs 26:2 ; and is there also associated with the tsippor , which our
version there renders bird, instead of sparrow  In both texts, the meaning agrees better with the swallow than the turtle-dove.”
213John Calvin Comm on Psalms (V3)
to his body, that is, it manifested itself in the utterance of the mouth, the languor of the eyes, and
the action of the hands. The reason why he longed so intensely to have access to the tabernacle
was, to enjoy the living God; not that he conceived of God as shut up in so narrow a place as was
the tent of the ark, 458 but he was convinced of the need he had of steps, by which to rise up to
heaven, and knew that the visible sanctuary served the purpose of a ladder, because, by it the minds
of the godly were directed and conducted to the heavenly model. And assuredly, when we consider
that the sluggishness of our flesh hinders us from elevating our minds to the height of the divine
majesty, in vain would God call us to himself, did he not at the same time, on his part, come down
to us; or, did he not at least, by the interposition of means, stretch out his hand to us, so to speak,
in order to lift us up to himself.
3The sparrow also hath found a house for herself, and the swallow a nest for herself.  Some
read this verse as one continuous sentence, conveying the idea that the birds made their nests near
the altars; 459 from which it might the more evidently appear how hard and distressing his condition
was in being kept at a distance from them. This opinion seems to be supported from the circumstance,
that immediately before the Hebrew word for altars, there is the particle   , eth, which is commonly
joined with the accusative case. But as it is also sometimes used in exclamations, the prophet, I
have no doubt, breaking off in the middle of his sentence all at once, exclaims, that nothing would
be more grateful to him than to behold the altar of God. David then, in the first place, with the view
of aggravating the misery of his condition, compares himself with the sparrows and swallows,
showing how hard a case it was for the children of Abraham to be driven out of the heritage which
had been promised them, whilst the little birds found some place or other for building their nests.
458 “Comme estort le pavillon de l’Arche .” — Fr.
459 This is the sense given in our English Bible; to the accuracy of which Dr Adam Clarke objects. “It is very unlikely,” says
he, “that sparrows and swallows, or birds of any kind, should be permitted to build their nests, and hatch their young, in or about
altars, which were kept in a state of the greatest purity , and where perpetual fires were kept for the purpose of sacrifice, burning
incense, etc.” He proposes to read the words beginning at the third verse and ending with her young ones , within a parenthesis,
and to explain the remaining part of the verse as the conclusion of the sentence commencing at verse 2d; or to read the parenthesis
as the close of verse 3d: “Even the sparrow hath found out a house, and the swallow (ring-dove) a nest for herself, where she
may lay her young; but I have no place either of rest or worship .” But though it cannot be reasonably supposed that these birds
would be permitted to nestle about the altar itself, before which the priests were continually serving; yet it is not improbable that
they were permitted to construct their nests in the houses near the altar. “The altar,” says Dr Paxton, “is here by a synecdoche
of a part for the whole, to be understood of the tabernacle, among the rafters of which, the sparrow and the swallow were allowed
to nestle; or rather for the buildings which surrounded the sacred edifice where the priests and their assistants had their ordinary
residence.” — Paxton ’s Illustrations of Scripture , volume 2, pages 310, 355. Dr Morison, after quoting the criticism of Dr Clarke,
observes, “I confess I see a great beauty in adhering to the sense given in the common version. Though the sparrow and ring-dove
are represented as finding a nest for themselves at the altars of the sanctuary, it does not follow that the inspired writer intends
any thing more than that, while he was exiled from the house of his God, these familiar birds had a home near that sacred spot
where he had associated his chief joys.” Parkhurst considers, that a comparison is intended; and that though the particles of
similitude “as” and “so” are not in the Hebrew text, they are to be understood. And in the Hebrew Scriptures, there are many
instances in which they are omitted, but where it is necessary to supply them to make an intelligible version. He translates as
follows: “Even (as) the sparrow findeth her house, and the dove her nest, where she hath laid her young, (so, should I find,) thy
altars, O Jehovah of Hosts! my King, and my God.” According to this exposition, the Psalmist illustrates his vehement longing
after the sacred tabernacle, and God’s public worship, by the natural affection of birds, and by that joy and delight with which
they return to their brood after they have been absent from them. (See Parkhurst’s Lexicon on    ,2.) Walford takes the same
view. His version is: —
“As the sparrow findeth a house, and the swallow a nest,
Where she may place her offspring,
So may thy altars be my abode, O Jehovah of Hosts!
My King, and my God.”
214John Calvin Comm on Psalms (V3)
He might sometimes find a comfortable retreat, and might even dwell among unbelievers with
some degree of honor and state; but so long as he was deprived of liberty of access to the sanctuary,
he seemed to himself to be in a manner banished from the whole world. Undoubtedly, the proper
end which we ought to propose to ourselves in living, is to be engaged in the service of God. The
manner in which he requires us to serve him is spiritual; but still it is necessary for us to make use
of those external aids which he has wisely appointed for our observance. This is the reason why
David all at once breaks forth into the exclamation, O thine altars! thou Jehovah of Hosts!  Some
might be ready to say in reference to his present circumstances, that there were many retreats in
the world, where he might live in safety and repose, yea, that there were many who would gladly
receive him as a guest under their roof, and that therefore he had no cause to be so greatly distressed.
To this he answers, that he would rather relinquish the whole world than continue in a state of
exclusion from the holy tabernacle; that he felt no place delightful at a distance from God’s altars;
and, in short, that no dwelling-place was agreeable to him beyond the limits of the Holy Land. This
he would intimate, by the appellations which he gives to God, My King, and my God.  In speaking
thus, he gives us to understand that his life was uncomfortable and embittered, because he was
banished from the kingdom of God. “Although all men,” as if he had said, “should vie with each
other in their eagerness to afford me shelter and entertainment, yet as thou art my King, what
pleasure would it afford me to live in the world, so long as I am excluded from the territory of the
Holy Land? And again, as thou art my God, for what end do I live but to seek after thee? Now,
when thou castest me off, should I not despise every place of retreat and shelter which is offered
me, however pleasant and delightful it may be to my flesh?”
4 Blessed are they who dwell in thy house.  Here the Psalmist expresses more distinctly the
proper and legitimate use of the sanctuary; and thus he distinguishes himself from hypocrites, who
are sedulously attentive to the observance of outward ceremonies, but destitute of genuine heart
godliness. David, on the contrary, testifies, that the true worshippers of God offer to him the sacrifice
of praise, which can never be dissociated from faith. Never will a man praise God from the heart,
unless, relying upon his grace, he is a partaker of spiritual peace and joy.
Psalm 84:5-7
5. Blessed is the man whose strength is in thee; the ways are in their hearts. 6. They passing
through the valley of weeping, 460 will together make it a fountain; 461 the rain also will cover the
460 “Ou, du meurier .” — Fr. marg . “Or, of the mulberry-tree.”
461 “Fontem ponent .” — Lat. “La rendent semblable a une fontaine .” — Fr.
215John Calvin Comm on Psalms (V3)
cisterns, [or reservoirs.] 4627. They will go from strength to strength; 463 the God of gods will be
seen in Zion.
 
5Blessed is the man whose strength is in thee.  David again informs us, that the purpose for
which he desired liberty of access to the sanctuary was, not merely to gratify his eyes with what
was to be seen there, but to make progress in faith. To lean with the whole heart upon God, is to
attain to no ordinary degree of advancement: and this cannot be attained by any man, unless all his
pride is laid prostrate in the dust, and his heart truly humbled. In proposing to himself this way of
seeking God, David’s object is to borrow from him by prayer the strength of which he feels himself
to be destitute. The concluding clause of the verse, the ways are in their hearts,464 is by some
interpreted as meaning, That those are happy who walk in the way which God has appointed; for
nothing is more injurious to a man than to trust in his own understanding. It is not improperly said
of the law, “This is the way, walk ye in it,” Isaiah 30:21 . Whenever then men turn aside, however
little it may be, from the divine law, they go astray, and become entangled in perverse errors. But
it is more appropriate to restrict the clause to the scope of the passage, and to understand it as
implying, that those are happy whose highest ambition it is to have God as the guide of their life,
and who therefore desire to draw near to him. God, as we have formerly observed, is not satisfied
with mere outward ceremonies. What he desires is, to rule and keep in subjection to himself all
whom he invites to his tabernacle. Whoever then has learned how great a blessedness it is to rely
upon God, will put forth all the desires and faculties of his mind, that with all speed he may hasten
to Him.
6They passing through the valley of weeping, will together make it a well.  The meaning of the
Psalmist is, that no impediments can prevent the enlightened and courageous worshippers of God
from making conscience of waiting upon the sanctuary. By this manner of speaking, he confirms
the statement which he had previously made, That nothing is more desirable than to be daily engaged
462 “Pools or reservoirs of water, as well as wells, are common in the Eastern deserts: the latter are supplied by springs, the
former by rains, as here noticed: but both are to be found in considerable numbers in Judea, and are, according to Rauwolff,
more numerous in these countries than springs that lie high; that is, than fountains and brooks of running water. Some of these
have been made for the use of the people that dwell in the neighborhood; some for travelers, and especially those that travel for
devotion; as for instance, such as go in pilgrimage to Mecca. The Psalmist appears to refer to provisions of this sort, made by
the devout Israelites in the way of their progress to Jerusalem.” — Mant .
This last clause has been very variously rendered. It has been understood by all the versions, in a different sense from that
given to it by Calvin and our English version, which agrees with him. The Septuagint reads: “The law-giver will give blessings.”
Dr Adam Clarke: “Yea, the instructor is covered, or clothed with blessings.” “God,” says he, “takes care to give his followers
teachers after his own heart, that shall feed them with knowledge: and while they are watering the people they are watered
themselves.” Mudge reads: “Even Moreh is clothed with ponds.” He translates the 5th, 6th, and 7th verses thus: — “How happy
the man whose strength is in thee! that travel the roads with their hearts. In the valley of Baca he maketh it a fountain; even
Moreh is clothed with ponds. They walk from strength to strength; he appeareth before God in Zion.” His note on these verses
is as follows: — “I join the latter end of the 5th to the first word of the 6th, (so the Seventy direct, and the sense seems to require,)
with a slight alteration into     ; the change of number, I have often observed, is not to be regarded. ‘How happy the man that
feels himself invigorated by thee; that travels the roads that lead to Jerusalem, with full bent of heart! He goes through the valley
of Baca as full of spirit as if it was cheered with a fountain of waters, and Moreh , as if it was filled with delicious ponds.’ (Two
desolate places I suppose, through which the road lay.) ‘He grows lustier as he walks; he appears before God in Zion.’”
463 “Ou, de troupe en troupe .” — Fr. marg . “Or, from company to company.”
464 “Heb. The ways are in his heart ; i.e., the highways to the temple are the objects of his delight. In the former verses he had
alluded to the happiness of the priests, etc., who were always engaged in the service of Jehovah; here he expresses the felicity
of other Israelites , who frequented the worship of the temple.” — DrGood ’s new Version of the Book of Psalms , with Notes .
216John Calvin Comm on Psalms (V3)
in the worship of God; showing, as he does, that no difficulties can put a stop to the ardent longings
of the godly, and prevent them from hastening with alacrity, yea, even though their way should be
through dry and barren deserts, to meet together to solemnise the holy assemblies. As the Hebrew
word     , habbacha, when the final letter is  , he, signifies tears, and when the final letter is  , aleph,
a mulberry tree, some here read valley of tears, and others, valley of the mulberry. The majority of
interpreters adopt the first reading; but the other opinion is not destitute of probability. 465 There is,
however, no doubt, that dry and barren deserts are here to be understood, in travelling through
which, much difficulty and privation must be endured, particularly from the want of water; drink
being of all other articles the most necessary to persons when travelling. David intended this as an
argument to prove the steadfastness of the godly, whom the scarcity of water, which often
discourages travelers from prosecuting their journey, will not hinder from hastening to seek God,
though their way should be through sandy and and vales. In these words, reproof is administered
to the slothfulness of those who will not submit to any inconvenience for the sake of being benefited
by the service of God. They indulge themselves in their own ease and pleasures, and allow nothing
to interfere with these. They will, therefore, provided they are not required to make any exertion
or sacrifice, readily profess themselves to be the servants of God; but they would not give a hair
of their head, or make the smallest sacrifice, to obtain the liberty of hearing the gospel preached,
and of enjoying the sacraments. This slothful spirit, as is evident from daily observation, keeps
multitudes fast bound to their nests, so that they cannot bear to forego in any degree their own ease
and convenience. Yea, even in those places where they are summoned by the sound of the church-bell
to public prayers 466 to hear the doctrine of salvation, or to partake of the holy mysteries, we see
that some give themselves to sleep, some think only of gain, some are entangled with the affairs
of the world, and others are engaged in their amusements. It is therefore not surprising, if those
who live at a distance, and who cannot enjoy these religious services and means of salvation, without
making some sacrifice of their worldly substance, remain lolling at home. That such may not live
secure and self-satisfied in the enjoyment of outward prosperity, David declares, that those who
have true heart religion, and who sincerely serve God, direct their steps to the sanctuary of God,
not only when the way is easy and cheerful, under the shade and through delightful paths, but also
when they must walk through rugged and barren deserts; and that they will rather make for
themselves cisterns with immense toil, than be prevented from prosecuting their journey by reason
of the drought of the country.
7They will go from strength to strength.  In this verse the same sentiment is repeated. Mount
Zion being the place where, according to the appointment of the law, the holy assemblies were
observed, after the ark of the covenant was removed thither, it is said, that the people of God will
come to Zion in great numbers, provoking one another to this good work. 467 The word    , chayil,
465 “Ou la cloche sonnera pour appeler les gens aux prieres publiques .” — Fr.
466 “Il dit que les fideles y viendront a grand foulle, et a l’envie l’un de l’autre, comme on dit .” — Fr.
467 “Horsley reads, ‘from wall to wall;’ Merrick, ‘from station to station;’ others, ‘from virtue to virtue,’ in the military sense.
All come to the same effect; they persevere through all difficulty or opposition, having their hearts set on reaching Zion’s hill.”
— Williams . “I think with Gejerus that the Hebrew may be translated from strength to strength , (answerably to the words  from
faith to faith , Romans 1:17 , and from glory to glory , 2 Corinthians 3:18 ,) and signify, that whereas other travelers grow more
and more weary as they travel, each of the pious persons here described shall, by the refreshments administered to them, proceed
from one degree of strength to another, viresque acquiret eundo . As Jerusalem is represented in the New Testament as a type of
heaven, I see nothing irrational in supposing that the inspired writer might, in describing the ascent to Jerusalem, have in view
also that spiritual progress which leads to the city which is above, the mother of us all. The words before us are certainly very
217John Calvin Comm on Psalms (V3)
seldom signifies a troop, or band of men, but most commonly power, or strength. It will therefore
be more in accordance with the ordinary use of the term, to translate, They will go from strength
to strength;468 implying, that the saints are continually acquiring fresh strength for going up to
mount Zion, and continue to prosecute their journey without weariness or fatigue, until they reach
the wished-for place, and behold the countenance of God. If the word troop is preferred, the meaning
will be, that not a few only will come, but numerous companies. The manner in which God
manifested himself to his servants in the temple in old time, we have spoken of elsewhere, and
especially on the 27th psalm, at the 4th and 5th verses. No visible image of God was there to be
seen; but the ark of the covenant was a symbol of his presence, and genuine worshippers found
from experience, that by this means they were greatly aided in approaching him.
Psalm 84:8-11
8. O Jehovah, God of Hosts! hear my prayer: O God of Jacob! hearken. Selah. 9. O God! our
shield, behold; and look upon the face of thy Anointed. 10. For better is one day in thy courts than
a thousand elsewhere. 469 I had rather be a door-keeper in the house of my God, than dwell in the
tents of wickedness. 11. For Jehovah God is our sun and shield: Jehovah will give grace and glory:
he will withhold no good thing from those who walk uprightly. O Jehovah of Hosts! blessed is the
man who trusteth in thee.
 
8O Jehovah, God of Hosts! hear my prayer.  David, instead of acting like worldly men, who
foolishly and unprofitably distress and torment themselves by inwardly cherishing their desires,
very wisely directs his wishes and prayers to God. From this it is also evident, that he was not
accustomed to indulge in ostentatious boasting, as is the case with many hypocrites, who present
to outward appearance a wonderful ardor of zeal, while yet the omniscient eye of God sees nothing
but coldness in their hearts. In the first place, he supplicates in general, that God would vouchsafe
to hear him. He next anticipates a temptation which might very readily arise from his being at
present apparently cut off from the Church, and wards it off, by associating and ranking himself
with all true believers, under the protection of God. Had he not been a member of the Church, he
could not have said generally, and as it were in the person of all its members, Our shield. Having
made this statement, he uses language still more expressive of high privilege, adducing the royal
anointing with which God had honored him by the hand of Samuel, 1 Samuel 16:12 . These words,
Look upon the face of thy anointed,  are very emphatic, and yet many interpreters pass over them
very frigidly. He encourages himself in the hope of obtaining the favor of God, from the consideration
that he had been anointed king in compliance with a divine command. Knowing, however, that his
kingdom was merely a shadow and type of something more illustrious, there is no doubt, that in
uttering these words, the object which he aspired after was, to obtain the divine favor through the
intervention of the Mediator of whom he was a type. I am personally unworthy, as if he had said,
applicable to the advances made in this progress, from strength to strength, from one stage of Christian perfection to another.”
— Merrick ’s Annotations .
468 “Ailleurs .” This supplement is not in the Latin version.
469 And therefore the verb       , histopheph , derived from this noun, signifies to sit at the threshold
218John Calvin Comm on Psalms (V3)
that thou shouldest restore me, but the anointing by which thou hast made me a type of the only
Redeemer will secure this blessing for me. We are thus taught, that the only way in which God
becomes reconciled to us is through the mediation of Christ, whose presence scatters and dissipates
all the dark clouds of our sins.
10. For better is one day in thy courts than a thousand elsewhere.  Unlike the greater part of
mankind, who desire to live without knowing why, wishing simply that their life may be prolonged,
David here testifies, not only that the end which he proposed to himself in living was to serve God,
but that in addition to this, he set a higher value on one day which he could spend in the divine
service, than upon a long time passed among the men of the world, from whose society true religion
is banished. It being lawful for none but the priests to enter into the inner and innermost courts of
the temple, David expressly declares, that provided he were permitted to have a place at the porch,
he would be contented with this humble station; for the Hebrew word   , saph,  signifies a door-post,
or the threshold of a house.470 The value which he set upon the sanctuary is presented in a very
striking light by the comparison, that hewould prefer having a place at the very doors of the temple,
to his having full possession of the tents of wickedness, the plain import of which is, that he would
rather be cast into a common and unhonoured place, provided he were among the people of God,
than exalted to the highest rank of honor among unbelievers. A rare example of godliness indeed!
Many are to be found who desire to occupy a place in the Church, but such is the sway which
ambition has over the minds of men, that very few are content to continue among the number of
the common and undistinguished class. Almost all are carried away with the frantic desire of rising
to distinction, and can never think of being at ease until they have attained to some station of
eminence.
11.Jehovah God is our sun and shield.  The idea conveyed by the comparison derived from the
sun is, that as the sun by his light vivifies, nourishes, and rejoices the world, so the benign
countenance of God fills with joy the hearts of his people, or rather, that they neither live nor breathe
except in so far as he shines upon them. By the term shield is meant, that our salvation, which
would otherwise be perilled by countless dangers, is in perfect safety under his protection. The
favor of God in communicating life to us would be far from adequate to the exigencies of our
condition, unless at the same time, in the midst of so many dangers, he interposed his power as a
buckler to defend us. The sentence immediately succeeding, he will give grace and glory , might
be viewed as meaning, that those whom God has distinguished by his grace in this world, will at
length be crowned with everlasting glory in his heavenly kingdom. But this distinction between
grace and glory being, I am afraid, too refined, it will be preferable to explain the sentence as
implying, that after God has once taken the faithful into his favor, he will advance them to high
honor, and never cease to enrich them with his blessings. 471 This interpretation is confirmed by the
following clause, He will withhold no good thing from those who walk uprightly,  obviously teaching
us, that God’s bounty can never be exhausted, but flows without intermission. We learn from these
words, that whatever excellence may be in us proceeds solely from the grace of God. They contain,
470 This explanation is adopted by Walford, who reads, “Jehovah giveth favor and honor.” “The common gloss on these words,”
he observes, “is, that God first bestows grace on earth, and then glory in heaven. But this is an interpretation of the ear rather
than of the understanding. The writer is evidently speaking of the present happy consequences of walking uprightly as he
immediately says. The judgment of Calvin agrees with this statement.”
471 “It is generally agreed, that the subject of this psalm is the return of the Jews from the Babylonish captivity; in celebrating
which, the Psalmist is carried by a prophetic impulse to foretell a much greater deliverance by the coming of Christ.” — Dimock .
219John Calvin Comm on Psalms (V3)
at the same time, this special mark, by which the genuine worshippers of God may be distinguished
from others, That their life is framed and regulated according to the principles of strict integrity.
The exclamation with which David concludes the psalm, Blessed is the man who trusteth in
thee,  seems to refer to the season of his banishment. He had previously described the blessedness
of those who dwell in the courts of the Lord, and now he avows, that although he was for a time
deprived of that privilege, he was far from being altogether miserable, because he was supported
by the best of all consolations, that which arose from beholding from a distance the grace of God.
This is an example well worthy of special attention. So long as we are deprived of God’s benefits,
we must necessarily groan and be sad in heart. But, that the sense of our distresses may not
overwhelm us, we ought to impress it upon our minds, that even in the midst of our calamities we
do not cease to be happy, when faith and patience are in exercise.
220John Calvin Comm on Psalms (V3)
