---
layout: calvin-chapter
book_id: psalms
book_name: 诗篇
chapter: 85
total_chapters: 150
header-img: psalm-bg-mountain.jpg
date: 2026-04-30 20:07
---

PSALM 85
God having afflicted his people with new troubles and calamities, after their return from their
captivity in Babylon, they, in the first place, make mention of their deliverance as an argument why
he should not leave unfinished the work of his grace. Then they complain of the long continuance
of their afflictions. And, in the third place, inspired with hope and confidence, they triumph in the
blessedness promised them; for their restoration to their own country was connected with the
kingdom of Christ, from which they anticipated an abundance of all good things. 472
To the chief musician, a Psalm of the sons of Korah.
Psalm 85:1-4
1. O Jehovah! thou hast been favorable to thy land: thou hast brought back the captivity of
Jacob. 2. Thou hast taken away the iniquity 473 of thy people: thou hast covered all their sins. Selah.
3. Thou hast turned away all thy anger: thou hast drawn back the fury of thy indignation. 4. Turn
us, O God of our salvation! and cause thy anger against us to cease.
 
1O Jehovah! thou hast been favorable to thy land.  Those who translate these words in the
future tense, in my opinion, mar their meaning. This psalm, it is probable, was endited to be sung
by the people when they were persecuted by the cruel tyranny of Antiochus; and from the deliverance
wrought for them in the past, they were encouraged to expect in the future, fresh and continued
tokens of the divine favor, — God having thereby testified, that their sins, however numerous and
aggravated, could not efface from his memory the remembrance of his covenant, so as to render
him inexorable towards the children of Abraham, and deaf to their prayers. 474 Had they not previously
experienced such remarkable proofs of the divine goodness, they must necessarily have been
overwhelmed with the load of their present afflictions, especially when so long protracted. The
cause of their deliverance from captivity they attribute to the free love with which God had embraced
the land which he had chosen for himself. Whence it follows, that the course of his favor was
unintermitted; and the faithful also were inspired with confidence in prayer, by the reflection that,
mindful of his choice, he had shown himself merciful to his own land. We have elsewhere had
occasion to remark, that nothing contributes more effectually to encourage us to come to the throne
of grace, than the remembrance of God’s former benefits. Our faith would immediately succumb
under adversity, and sorrow would choke our hearts, were we not taught to believe from the
472 “         , nasata avon , ‘Thou hast borne, or carried away, the iniquity. An allusion to the ceremony of the scape-goat .” —
Dr Adam Clarke  “It is a maxim among the Jewish doctors,” says Hammond, “that captivity is one way of expiation, and so to
return from thence was a sure indication that the sin for which it was inflicted was remitted or done away. This, saith Abarbanel,
on Leviticus 16 , was adumbrated in the Azazel , or scape-goat , which, as the other that was slain, was a sin-offering , as appears,
Leviticus 16:5 . ‘He shall take two kids for a sin-offering.’ And then the ‘confessing the sins over him,’ mentioned 16:21 , (‘Aaron
shall lay both his hands on the head of the live goat, and confess over him all the iniquities of the children of Israel, etc., putting
them on the head of the goat: And the goat shall bear upon him all their iniquities into a land of separation,’ 16:22 ,) shows that
they were to carry their sins with them into the land of their captivity, meant by the land of separation , that land whatsoever it
was, whither the Divine Providence had designed their deportation. From whence therefore being now returned, their sins, for
which they were thus punished, are supposed to be left behind them, no more to be laid to their charge, if their return to their
former sins do not cause them to be called to remembrance.”
473 “Ne faire qu’il ne fust enclin et pitie envers les enfans d’Abraham pour exaucer leurs prieres .” — Fr.
474 “Ou, si est ce que.” —  Fr. marg . “Or, Yet.”
221John Calvin Comm on Psalms (V3)
experience of the past, that he is inclined compassionately to hear the prayers of his servants, and
always affords them succor when the exigencies of their circumstances require it; especially as
there remains at all times the same reason for continuing his goodness. Thus the prophet happily
applies to believers of his own day, the benefits which God in old time bestowed upon their fathers,
because both they and their fathers were called to the hope of the same inheritance.
2Thou hast taken away the iniquity of thy people.  It was very natural for the faithful to feel
alarmed and perplexed on account of their sins, and therefore the prophet removes all ground for
overwhelming apprehension, by showing them, that God, in delivering his people, had given an
irrefragable proof of free forgiveness. He had before traced this deliverance to the mere good
pleasure and free grace of God as its source; but after it was wrought, the iniquities of the people
having separated between them and their God, and estranged them from him, it was necessary that
the remedy of pardon should be brought to their aid. In saying that their iniquities were taken away,
he does not refer to the faithful being reformed and purged from their sins, in other words, to that
work by which God, sanctifying them by the Spirit of regeneration, actually removes sin from them.
What he intended to say he explains immediately after. The amount, in short, is, that God was
reconciled to the Jews by not imputing their sins to them. When God is said to cover sins, the
meaning is, that he buries them, so that they come not into judgment, as we have shown more at
large on the 32nd psalm, at the beginning. When, therefore, he had punished the sins of his people
by captivity, it being his will to restore them again to their own country, he removed the great
impediment to this, by blotting out their transgressions; for deliverance from punishment depends
upon the remission of sin. Thus we are furnished with an argument in confutation of that foolish
conceit of the Sophists, which they set forth as some great mystery, That God retains the punishment
although he forgive the fault; whereas God announces in every part of his word, that his object in
pardoning is, that being pacified, he may at the same time mitigate the punishment. Of this we have
an additional confirmation in the following verse, where we are informed, that God was mercifully
inclined towards his people, that he might withdraw his hand from chastising them. What answer
in any degree plausible can be given to this by the Sophists, who affirm that God would not be
righteous did he not, after he had forgiven the fault, execute punishment according to the strict
demands of his justice? The sequence of the pardon of sin is, that God by his blessing testifies that
he is no longer displeased.
4Turn us, O God of our salvation!  The faithful now make a practical application to themselves,
in their present circumstances, of what they had rehearsed before concerning God’s paternal
tenderness towards his people whom he had redeemed. And they attribute to him, by whom they
desire to be restored to their former state, the appellation, O God of our salvation!  to encourage
themselves, even in the most desperate circumstances, in the hope of being delivered by the power
of God. Although to the eye of sense and reason there may be no apparent ground to hope favourably
as to our condition, it becomes us to believe that our salvation rests secure in his hand, and that,
whenever he pleases, he can easily and readily find the means of bringing salvation to us. God’s
anger being the cause and origin of all calamities, the faithful beseech him to remove it. This order
demands our special attention; for so effeminate and faint-hearted in bearing adversity are we, that
no sooner does God begin to smite us with his little finger, than we entreat him, with groaning and
lamentable cries, to spare us. But we forget to plead, what should chiefly engage our thoughts, that
he would deliver us from guilt and condemnation; and we forget this because we are reluctant to
descend into our own hearts and to examine ourselves.
222John Calvin Comm on Psalms (V3)
Psalm 85:5-8
5. Wilt thou be wroth against us for ever? wilt thou prolong thy displeasure from age to age?
6. Wilt thou not turn again and quicken us? and thy people will rejoice in thee. 7. Show us thy
mercy, O Jehovah! and grant us thy salvation. 8. I will hear what God Jehovah will speak: surely
he will speak peace to his people and to his meek ones, and they will not turn again to folly.
 
5Wilt thou be wroth against us for ever?  Here the godly bewail the long continuance of their
afflictions, and derive an argument in prayer from the nature of God, as it is described in the law,
—
“The Lord, The Lord God, merciful and gracious, long-suffering, and abundant in goodness
and truth, keeping mercy for thousands, forgiving iniquity, and transgression, and sin,”
(Exodus 34:6, 7 ,)
— a truth which has also been brought under our notice in Psalm 30:5 , “For his anger endureth
but a moment; in his favor is life: weeping may endure for a night, but joy cometh in the morning.”
It thus becomes us, when we engage in prayer, to meditate upon the Divine promises that we may
be furnished with suitable expressions. It may seem, at first view, that these devout Jews find fault
with God, as if he exhibited his character to them in a light very different from that in which he
was wont to exhibit it; but the object they had in view undoubtedly was to obtain, in the struggle
they were resolutely maintaining against temptation, hope of relief from the contemplation of the
nature of God; as if they laid it down as a fixed principle, that it is impossible for Him to be angry
for ever. We may observe, by the way, that it is evident, from their praying in this manner, that
they were weighed down with such an oppressive load of calamities, as to be almost unable any
longer to endure them. Let us therefore learn, that although God may not immediately grant us
manifest tokens of his returning favor, yet we must not cease to persevere in earnest prayer. If it is
objected, that then God has promised in vain that his anger would be of short duration, I answer,
that if we entertain suitable views of our own sins, his anger will assuredly appear to be always of
short continuance; and if we call to remembrance the everlasting course of his mercy, we will
confess that his anger endures but for a moment. As our corrupt nature is ever relapsing into the
wanton indulgence of its native propensities, manifold corrections are indispensably necessary to
subdue it thoroughly.
The godly, still dwelling on the same theme, ask, in the 6th verse, whether God will not turn
again and quicken them  Being fully convinced of the truth of this principle, That the punishments
with which God chastises his children are only temporary; they thereby encourage themselves in
the confident expectation, that although he may be now justly displeased, and may have turned
away his face from them, yet, when they implore his mercy, he will be entreated, and raising the
dead to life again, will turn their mourning into gladness. By the word quicken, they complain that
they almost resemble persons who are dead, or that they are stunned and laid prostrate with
afflictions. And when they promise themselves matter of rejoicing, they intimate that in the meantime
they are well nigh worn out with sorrow.
7. Show us thy mercy, O Jehovah!  In these words there is the same contrast as in the preceding
sentence. In supplicating that mercy may be extended to them, and deliverance granted them, they
confess that they are deprived of all sense of both these blessings. Such having been the state of
the saints in old time, let us learn, even when we are so oppressed with calamities as to be reduced
223John Calvin Comm on Psalms (V3)
to extremity, and on the brink of despair, to betake ourselves notwithstanding to God. Mercy is
appropriately put in the first place; and then there is added salvation, which is the work and fruit
of mercy; for no other reason can be assigned why God is induced to show himself our Savior, but
that he is merciful. Whence it follows, that all who urge their own merits before Him as a plea for
obtaining his favor, are shutting up the way of salvation.
8. I will hear what God Jehovah will speak.  The prophet, by his own example, here exhorts the
whole body of the Church to quiet and calm endurance. As he had burst forth under the influence
of strong emotion into a degree of vehemence, he now restrains himself as it were with a bridle;
and in all our desires, be they never so devout and holy, we must always beware of their running
to excess. When a man gives indulgence to his own infirmity, he is easily carried beyond the bounds
of moderation by an undue ardor. For this reason the prophet enjoins silence, both upon himself
and others, that they may patiently wait God’s own time. By these words, he shows that he was in
a composed state of mind, and, as it were, continued silent, because he was persuaded that the care
of God is exercised about his Church. Had he thought that fortune held the sovereignty of the world,
and that mankind are whirled round by a blind impulse, he would not, as he does, have represented
God as sustaining the function of governing. To speak, in this passage, is equivalent to command,
or to appoint. It is, as if he had said, Being confident that the remedy for our present calamities is
in the hand of God, I will remain quiet until the fit time for delivering the Church arrive. As then
the unruliness of our passions murmur, and raise an uproar against God, so patience is a kind of
silence by which the godly keep themselves in subjection to his authority. In the second clause of
the verse, the Psalmist comes to the conclusion, that the condition of the Church will be more
prosperous: Surely he will speak peace to his people, and to his meek ones.  As God rules supreme
over the affairs of men, he cannot but provide for the welfare of his Church, which is the object of
his special love. The word peace, we have elsewhere shown, is employed by the Hebrews to denote
prosperity; and, accordingly, what is here expressed is, that the Church, by the Divine blessing,
will prosper. Moreover, by the word speak, it is intimated that God will not fail to regard his
promises. The Psalmist might have spoken more plainly of Divine Providence, as for instance in
these terms, “I will look to what God will do;” but as the benefits bestowed upon the Church flow
from the Divine promises, he makes mention of God’s mouth rather than of his hand; and, at the
same time, he shows that patience depends upon the quiet hearing of faith. When those to whom
God speaks peace are not only described as his people, but also as his meek ones, this is a mark by
which the genuine people of God are distinguished from such as bear merely the title of his people.
As hypocrites arrogantly claim to themselves all the privileges of the Church, it is requisite to repel
and exhibit the groundlessness of their boasting, in order to let them know that they are justly
excluded from the promises of God.
And they will not turn again to folly.  The particle rendered and has usually been explained in
this way: That they may not turn again to folly; as if this clause were added to express the fruit of
the Divine goodness. As God, in dealing graciously with his people, allures them to himself, that
they may continue obedient to him, the prophet, as these interpreters contend, maintains that they
will not again return to folly, because the Divine goodness will serve as a bridle to restrain them.
This exposition is admissible; but it will be more suitable to refer the sentence to the whole subject
comprised in the passage — to regard it, in short, as meaning, that after God has sufficiently chastised
his Church, he will at length show himself merciful to her, that the saints, taught by chastisements,
may exercise a stricter vigilance over themselves in future. The cause is shown why God suspends
224John Calvin Comm on Psalms (V3)
and delays the communications of his grace. As the physician, although his patient may experience
some alleviation of his disease, keeps him still under medicinal treatment, until he become fully
convalescent, and until, the cause of his disease being removed, his constitution become invigorated,
— for to allow him all at once to use whatever diet he chose, would be highly injurious to him; —
so God, perceiving that we are not completely recovered from our vices to spiritual health in one
day, prolongs his chastisements: without which we would be in danger of a speedy relapse.
Accordingly, the prophet, to assuage the grief with which the protracted duration of calamities
would oppress the faithful, applies this remedy and solace, That God purposely continues his
corrections for a longer period than they would wish, that they may be brought in good earnest to
repent, and excited to be more on their guard in future.
Psalm 85:9-13
9. Surely 475 his salvation is near to them that fear him, that glory may dwell in our land. 10.
Mercy and truth shall meet together; righteousness and peace shall kiss each other. 11. Truth shall
spring [or bud] out of the earth; and righteousness shall look down from heaven. 12. Likewise,
Jehovah will grant prosperity: and our land shall yield her increase. 13. Righteousness shall go
before him; and set her steps in the way.
 
9Surely his salvation is near to them that fear him.  Here the Psalmist confirms the statement
made in the preceding verse. He encourages both himself and other servants of God in the hope,
that although to outward appearance God was far off from his people, yet deliverance was near at
hand; because it is certain, that God secretly regards those whom he seems openly to neglect. If it
is considered preferable to take the particle   , ach, adversatively, Yet his salvation, etc., — a sense
in which it is often used in Hebrew — the sentence will be fuller. The prophet had just now said,
that God continues to lengthen out the chastisement of his people, when he perceives that they are
too prone to fall anew into sin; and here, lest his slowness in removing the stroke of his hand should
prove too much for their patience, he qualifies the above statement, by observing, that even when
the Divine help seems slowest in coming it is then near at hand. The glory which in the second part
of the verse he anticipates will dwell in the land, is undoubtedly set in opposition to the ruinous
appearance it then presented to the eye, which was a token of the dreadful anger of God, and which
consigned the land to ignominy and reproach. 476 By this language, therefore, he encourages himself
475 Walford, who thinks that the composition of this psalm is referable to some period subsequent to the return of God’s ancient
people from Babylon, explains this concluding clause of the 9th verse as follows: — “The glory that is here spoken of is that
which was formerly enjoyed, when they were surrounded on all sides by prosperity; and when especially they were favored with
the tokens of the divine presence, in the performance of all the instituted worship of the sanctuary, when the ark, the temples
etc., were in their pristine beauty and splendor.”
476 Mercy and truth are very generally applied by commentators to God; and the passage is understood as the celebration of
the harmony of the divine attributes in the salvation of man. The description is one of great beauty and sublimity. “How admirable,”
says Bishop Lowth, in illustrating this verse, “is that celebrated personification of the divine attributes by the Psalmist; How
just, elegant, and splendid does it appear, if applied only according to the literal sense, to the restoration of the Jewish nation
from the Babylonish captivity! but if interpreted as relating to that sublimer, more sacred, and mystical sense, which is not
obscurely shadowed under the ostensible image, it is certainly uncommonly noble and elevated, mysterious and sublime.” —
(Lowth ’s Lectures on Hebrew Poetry , volume 1, page 284.)
225John Calvin Comm on Psalms (V3)
and other genuine believers to repentance, putting them in mind, that the grievous oppression,
accompanied with insult and derision, to which they were subjected by the tyranny of their enemies,
was to be ascribed entirely to their having driven away the salvation of God from them by their
sins.
10.Mercy and truth shall meet together.  Here the verbs are in the past tense; but it is evident
from the scope of the passage, that they should be translated into the future. I cordially embrace
the opinion which is held by many, that we have here a prophecy concerning the kingdom of Christ.
There is no doubt, that the faithful lifted up their eyes to Him, when their faith had need of
encouragement and support in reference to the restoration of the Church; and especially after their
return from Babylon. Meanwhile, the design of the prophet is, to show how bountifully God deals
with his Church, after he is reconciled to her. The fruits which he represents as springing from this
reconciliation are, first, that  mercy and truth meet together;  and, secondly, that righteousness and
peace embrace each other  From these words, Augustine deduces a beautiful sentiment, and one
fraught with the sweetest consolation, That the mercy of God is the origin and source of all his
promises, from whence issues the righteousness which is offered to us by the gospel, while from
that righteousness proceeds the peace which we obtain by faith, when God justifies us freely.
According to him, righteousness is represented as looking down from heaven,  because it is the free
gift of God, and not acquired by the merit of works; and that it comes from heaven, because it is
not to be found among men, who are by nature utterly destitute of it. He also explains truth springing
out of the earth  as meaning, that God affords the most incontestable evidence of his faithfulness,
in fulfilling what he has promised. But as we ought rather to seek after the solid truth, than exercise
our ingenuity in searching out refined interpretations, let us rest contented with the natural meaning
of the passage, which is, that mercy, truth, peace, and righteousness, will form the grand and
ennobling distinction of the kingdom of Christ. The prophet does not proclaim the praises of men,
but commends the grace which he had before hoped for, and supplicated from God only; thus
teaching us to regard it as an undoubted truth, that all these blessings flow from God. By the figure
synecdoche, some parts being put for the whole, there is described in these four words all the
ingredients of true happiness. When cruelty rages with impunity, when truth is extinguished, when
righteousness is oppressed and trampled under foot, and when all things are embroiled in confusion,
were it not better that the world should be brought to an end, than that such a state of things should
continue? Whence it follows, that nothing can contribute more effectually to the promotion of a
happy life, than that these four virtues should flourish and rule supreme. The reign of Christ, in
other parts of Scripture, is adorned with almost similar encomiums. If, however, any one would
rather understand mercy and truth as referring to God, I have no disposition to enter into dispute
Dr Adam Clarke gives a turn to the text, which still more heightens its effect. “It would be more simple,” says he, “to
translate the original,
‘Mercy and truth have met on the way;
Righteousness and peace have embraced.’
This is a remarkable text, and much has been said on it: but there is a beauty in it, which I think has not been noticed.
“Mercy  and peace are on one side: truth and righteousness on the other. Truth requires righteousness ; mercy calls for peace .
“They meet together on the way; one going to make inquisition for sin, the other to plead for reconciliation. Having met,
their differences on certain considerations (not here particularly mentioned) are adjusted: their mutual claims are blended together
in one common interest; on which peace and righteousness immediately embrace. Thus righteousness is given to truth ; and
peace is given to mercy . “Now, Where did these meet? — In Christ Jesus. “When were they reconciled? — When He poured
out His life on Calvary.”
226John Calvin Comm on Psalms (V3)
with him. 477The springing of truth out of the earth, and the looking down of righteousness from
heaven, without doubt imply, that truth and righteousness will be universally diffused, as well above
as beneath, so as to fill both heaven and earth. It is not meant to attribute something different to
each of them, but to affirm in general, that there will be no corner of the earth where these qualities
do not flourish.
12.Likewise, Jehovah will grant prosperity.  Some take this verse allegorically, and interpret it
of the increase of spiritual blessings; but this does not agree with the particle   , gam, rendered
likewise, by which the prophet, in my opinion, intends to express the completeness of that blessedness
of which he had spoken. He therefore mentions the fruit of the earth, as an additional proof of God’s
surpassing beneficence. The chief happiness of the Church is comprehended in these four blessings
which he had specified; but the provision which is required for the support of our bodies ought not
to be considered as unworthy of attention, provided our care about this matter is kept within proper
bounds. If it is objected that these two subjects — the spiritual kingdom of Christ, and the fruitfulness
of the earth, are improperly intermingled, it may be easily observed in reply, that there is nothing
at all incongruous in this, when we consider that God, while he bestows upon his people spiritual
blessings, gives them, in addition to these, some taste of his fatherly love, in the outward benefits
which relate to the life of the body; it being evident from the testimony of Paul, that
“godliness is profitable unto all things, having promise of the life that now is, and of that which
is to come,” ( 1 Timothy 4:8 .)
But let it be observed, that the faithful generally have only granted to them a limited portion of
the comforts of this transitory life: that they may not be lulled asleep by the allurements of earth.
I have therefore said, that, while on earth, they only taste of God’s fatherly love, and are not filled
with an overflowing abundance of the good things of this world. Moreover, we are taught from this
verse, that the power and capacity of the earth to produce fruit for the sustenance of our bodies was
not given to it once for all, — as the heathen imagine God at the first creation to have adapted each
element to its proper office, while he now sits in heaven in a state of indolence and repose; — but
that the earth is from year to year rendered fruitful by the secret influence of God, who designs
hereby to afford us a manifestation of his goodness.
13.Righteousness shall go before him.  The word righteousness is taken by some for a righteous
person; but this is unnatural. Viewed in this light, the passage, indeed, contains the useful and
important truth, That the righteous man will walk before God, and will make it his object to regulate
all his actions according to the principles of moral rectitude. But there being no necessity for
wresting the word righteousness so violently, it will be better to adopt the more correct and simple
view, which is, that under the reign of Christ order will be so well established, that righteousness
will walk before God, and occupy every path. The prophet seems thus to call back the attention of
the faithful to what constitutes the chief elements of blessedness; for although God may grant to
his servants an abundant supply of sustenance for the body, it is unbecoming for them to have their
hearts set upon this. And in truth, one difference between us and the lower animals is, that God,
instead of pampering and stuffing our bellies, for the mere gratification of our animal appetites,
directs our views to higher and more important objects. When it is said that righteousness shall go
before God, the meaning is, that the prevalence and unobstructed course of righteousness, which
is equivalent to setting her steps in the way, is to be attributed to the appointment of God. Isaiah,
477 “Pource qu’on luy defend de se trouver en public et que chacun la repousse .” — Fr.
227John Calvin Comm on Psalms (V3)
on the contrary, complains that equity, instead of setting her steps in the way, is prohibited from
making her appearance in public, and meets with a universal repulse. “And judgment is turned
away backward, and justice standeth afar off: for truth is fallen in the street, and equity cannot
enter,” ( Isaiah 59:14 .) In this psalm prayers and holy meditations, engaged in with the view of
nourishing and confirming faith, together with praises and thanksgivings, are intermingled. It having
been difficult in the judgment of carnal reason for David to escape from the distresses with which
he was environed, he sets in opposition to its conclusions the infinite goodness and power of God.
Nor does he simply request deliverance from his enemies; but he also prays that the fear of God
may be implanted and firmly established in his heart.
228John Calvin Comm on Psalms (V3)
