---
layout: calvin-chapter
book_id: psalms
book_name: 诗篇
chapter: 89
total_chapters: 150
header-img: psalm-bg-mountain.jpg
date: 2026-04-30 20:07
---

PSALM 89
The prophet who wrote this psalm, whoever he was, in approaching the throne of grace to make
supplication to God in behalf of the afflicted Church, lays down, as an encouragement both to
himself and the rest of the faithful to cherish good hope, the covenant which God had made with
David. He then adverts in general to the Divine power which is discerned in the whole government
of the world. And next, he calls to remembrance the redemption in which God had given an
everlasting testimony of his fatherly love towards his chosen people. Thence, he again returns to
the covenant made with David, in which God had promised to continue his favor towards that
people for ever, for the sake of their king. Finally, he subjoins a complaint that God, as if he had
forgotten his covenant, abandoned his Church to the will of her enemies, and, in the midst of strange
disaster and mournful desolation, withheld all succor and consolation.
An instruction of Ethan, the Ezrahite.
Who this Ethan was, to whom this psalm is ascribed, is somewhat uncertain. If we should
consider him to have been one of the four eminent men to whom Solomon is compared for his
distinguished wisdom, ( 1 Kings 4:31 ) 520 the argument or subject of the poem will not agree with
his time; unless we suppose him to have survived Solomon, and bewailed the sad and mournful
division which occurred after the death of that monarch, and which proved the commencement and
prelude of future ruin. The people, it is true, after being divided into two kingdoms, continued still
to exist safe as before; but as that rupture dissolved the unity established by God, what ground of
hope could any longer remain? Besides, the prosperity and welfare of the whole body depended
upon their having one head, from their allegiance to whom the ten tribes had wickedly revolted.
What a horrible spectacle was it to behold that kingdom, which might have flourished in unimpaired
vigor, even to the end of the world, disfigured and miserably rent asunder, at the close of the life
of one man! Who would not have thought that the holy oracle was deceptive and vain, the truth of
which seemed to be overthrown in so short a time? If, therefore, the Ethan above referred to should
be regarded as the author of this psalm, the complaints contained in it must be applied to that period,
in which not only the throne of David was weakened, but in which also the great mass of the people
apostatised from God, while those who were brethren proceeded to work each other’s ruin by mutual
and intestine discord. This certainly appears to me to be the most probable conjecture in this doubtful
case. Some think that the author, speaking under the influence of the Spirit of prophecy, predicts
the calamities which were to befall the people: but this opinion may be easily refuted by the context
itself, where the inspired bard expressly bewails the first unhappy alteration which took place in
the kingdom, in consequence of the conspiracy of Jeroboam.
Psalm 89:1-4
1. I will sing of the mercies of Jehovah for ever: with my mouth will I celebrate thy truth from
generation to generation. 2. For I have said, Mercy shall be built up for ever: thou shalt establish
the heavens, thy truth is in them. 5213. I have made a covenant with my chosen: I have sworn to
520 The Hebrew verb for “doubting” is,      , aphunah  It means “to turn this way and that,” as a person in great distress, not
knowing, as we say, which way to turn himself. (See Parkhurst’s Lexicon,    , 8.)
521 The Ethan celebrated in that passage, according to some, is the same person who is mentioned in 1 Chronicles 2:6 , as the
grandson of Judah. (See page 406, note 2. ) But that this psalm could not have been written by him is evident, as we have there
252John Calvin Comm on Psalms (V3)
David my servant, 4. I will establish thy seed for ever, and will build up thy throne from age to
age. Selah.
 
1 I will sing of the mercies of Jehovah for ever.  It must be borne in mind, as I have just now
observed, that the Psalmist opens with the praises of God, and with calling to mind the Divine
covenant, to encourage the faithful to strengthen their faith against the formidable assaults of
temptation. If when we set about the duty of prayer some despairing thought, at the very outset,
presents itself to us, we must forcibly and resolutely break through it, lest our hearts faint and utterly
fail. The design of the prophet, therefore, was to fortify the minds of the godly at the very
commencement, with stable and substantial supports, that, relying on the Divine promise, which,
to outward appearance, had almost fallen to the ground, and repelling all the assaults of temptation
with which their faith was severely shaken, they might with confidence hope for the re-establishment
of the kingdom, and continue perseveringly to pray for this blessing. From the sad spectacle of
begun decay, 522 which Ethan beheld, listening to the dictates of carnal reason, he might have thought
that both himself and the rest of God’s believing people were deceived; but he expresses his
determination to celebrate the mercies of God which at that time were hidden from his view. And
as it was no easy matter for him to apprehend and acknowledge the merciful character of God, of
whose severity he had actual experience, he uses the plural number, the Mercies of God, that by
reflecting on the abundance and variety of the blessings of Divine grace he might overcome this
temptation.
2 For I have said, Mercy shall be built up for ever.  He assigns the reason why he perseveres
in singing the Divine praises in the midst of adversities; which is, that he does not despair of the
manifestation of God’s loving-kindness towards his people, although at present they were under
severe chastisement. Never will a man freely open his mouth to praise God, unless he is fully
persuaded that God, even when he is angry with his people, never lays aside his fatherly affection
towards them. The words I have said, imply that the truth which the inspired writer propounds was
deeply fixed in his heart. 523 Whatever, as if he had said, has hitherto happened, it has never had
the effect of effacing from my heart the undoubted hope of experiencing the Divine favor as to the
future, and I will always continue steadfastly to cherish the same feeling. It is to be observed, that
it was not without a painful and arduous conflict that he succeeded in embracing by faith the
goodness of God, which at that time had entirely vanished out of sight; — this we say is to be
particularly noticed, in order that when God at any time withdraws from us all the tokens of his
love, we may nevertheless learn to erect in our hearts that everlasting building of mercy, which is
here spoken of, — a metaphor, by which is meant that the Divine mercy shall be extended, or shall
observed, from several allusions contained in it to events which happened even posterior to the days of David. A person of this
name was one of the chief musicians in the time of David, ( 1 Chronicles 25:1 ,) but he was a Levite; whereas this Ethan is called
an Ezrahite. Nichols thinks it probable that the author, like Heman, was of the family of Zerah, and wrote this psalm during the
captivity, most likely in the time of Jehoiakim, whose misfortunes he seems here to describe in a spirit of despondency,
notwithstanding the promises made to David.
522 Ainsworth’s translation of this last clause is both literal and elegant. “The heavens, thou wilt establish thy faithfulness in
them.” Dr Kennicott, in his Remarks on Select Passages of the Old Testament, here refers to verses 37, 38, “where,” says he,
“it appears that the sun, the moon, and the bow in the sky, were the tokens of confirmation given by God to the covenant made
with David.” “The meaning of this passage,” says Warner, “appears to be, that the constancy of the celestial motions, the regular
vicissitudes of day and night, and alternations of the seasons, were emblems of God’s own immutability.”
523 “Ex tristi ruinae spectaculo .” — Lat. “Voyant ce commoncement pitoyable d’une ruine .” — Fr.
253John Calvin Comm on Psalms (V3)
continue till it reach its end or consummation. In the second clause of the verse something must be
supplied. The sense, in short, is, that the Divine promise is no less stable than the settled course of
the heavens, which is eternal and exempt from all change. By the word heavens I understand not
only the visible skies, but the heavens which are above the whole frame of the world; for the truth
of God, in the heavenly glory of his kingdom, is placed above all the elements of the world.
3I have made a covenant with my chosen.524 The more effectually to confirm himself and all
the godly in the faith of the Divine promise, he introduces God himself as speaking and sanctioning,
by his authority, what had been said in the preceding verse. As faith ought to depend on the Divine
promise, this manner of speaking, by which God is represented as coming forward and alluring us
to himself by his own voice, is more forcible than if the prophet himself had simply stated the fact.
And when God in this way anticipates us, we cannot be charged with rashness in coming familiarly
to him; even as, on the contrary, without His word we have no ground to presume that he will be
gracious to us, or to hope, at the mere suggestion of our own fancy, for what he has not promised.
Moreover, the truth of the promise is rendered still more irrefragable, when God declares that he
had made a covenant with his servant David, ratified by his own solemn oath. It having been
customary in ancient times to engrave leagues and covenants on tables of brass, a metaphor is here
used borrowed from this practice. God applies to David two titles of distinction, calling him both
his chosen and his servant. Those who would refer the former appellation to Abraham do not
sufficiently attend to the style of the Book of Psalms, in which it is quite common for one thing to
be repeated twice. David is called the chosen of God, because God of his own good pleasure, and
from no other cause, preferred him not only to the posterity of Saul, and many distinguished
personages, but even to his own brethren. If, therefore, the cause or origin of this covenant is sought
for, we must necessarily fall back upon the Divine election.
The name of servant, which follows immediately after, is not to be understood as implying that
David by his services merited any thing at the hand of God. He is called God’s servant in respect
of the royal dignity, into which he had not rashly thrust himself, having been invested with the
government by God, and having undertaken it in obedience to his lawful call. When, however, we
consider what the covenant summarily contains, we conclude that the prophet has not improperly
applied it to his own use, and to the use of the whole people; for God did not enter into it with
David individually, but had an eye to the whole body of the Church, which would exist from age
to age. The sentence, I will establish thy throne for ever, is partly to be understood of Solomon,
and the rest of David’s successors; but the prophet well knew that perpetuity or everlasting duration,
in the strict and proper sense, could be verified only in Christ. In ordaining one man to be king,
God assuredly did not have a respect to one house alone, while he forgot and neglected the people
with whom he had before made his covenant in the person of Abraham; but he conferred the
sovereign power upon David and his children, that they might rule for the common good of all the
rest, until the throne might be truly established by the advent of Christ.
524 “The word      , ‘I have said,’ is used, in the Book of Psalms, to express two things; either a fixed purpose, or a settled
opinion of the person speaking. The Psalmist, therefore, delivers the whole of this second verse in his own person, and introduces
not God speaking till the next verse.” — Horsley
254John Calvin Comm on Psalms (V3)
Psalm 89:5-8
5. And the heavens shall praise thy wondrous work, O Jehovah! thy truth 525 also in the
congregation of the saints. 6. For who in the clouds [or in heaven] can be compared to Jehovah?
who among the sons of the gods 526 is like to Jehovah? 7. God is very terrible 527 in the assembly
of the saints, and to be feared above all who are around him. 8. O Jehovah! God of Hosts, who is
a strong God as thou art? and thy truth is round about thee.
 
5.And the heavens shall praise thy wondrous work.  The prophet, having spoken of God’s
covenant, even as faith ought to begin at the word, now descends to a general commendation of
his works. It is, however, to be observed, that when he treats of the wonderful power of God, he
has no other end in view than to exalt and magnify more highly the holiness of the covenant. He
exclaims, that this is the God who has rightful claims to be served and feared, who ought to be
believed, and upon whose power the most unhesitating confidence may be reposed. The words
wondrous work, in the first clause, I would therefore limit to the power which God displays in
preserving and maintaining his Church. The heavens, it is true, are most excellent witnesses and
preachers of God’s wonderful power; but from attending to the scope of the passage, it will be still
more evident, that the encomiums here pronounced have all a special reference to the end of which
I have spoken. Some interpreters judiciously explain the word heavens, of the angels, among whom
there is a common joy and congratulation in the salvation of the Church. This interpretation is
confirmed from the last clause of the verse, in which it is asserted, that God’s truth will be celebrated
in the congregation of the saints  There is no doubt, that the same subject is here prosecuted, and
that by the word truth, it is intended to signalise the remarkable deliverances by which God had
manifested his faithfulness to the promises made to his servants.
6For who in the clouds can be compared to Jehovah?  The prophet now proceeds to illustrate
farther what he had said respecting God’s wonders, and exclaims emphatically, Who in the clouds
can be compared to God?  The reason why he speaks of the clouds, or heaven, is because, what is
not surprising, nothing is to be found upon the earth which can at all approach the glory of God.
Although man excels other living creatures, yet we see how contemptible and miserable his condition
is, or rather, how full it is of shame and reproach. Whence it follows, that under heaven there is no
excellence which can compete with that of God. But when we ascend to heaven, immediately
ravished with admiration, we conceive of a multitude of gods, which do away with the true God.
The last clause of the verse, in which it is said, that among the sons of the gods there is none like
525 “Comp. 2 Samuel 7:11 , etc. In 5:3 and 5:4, the Psalmist introduces God as speaking on a subject which he resumes in 5:34;
so that the intervening verses may be considered as parenthetical.” — Cresswell .
526 “ — and thy truth ” — Le Clerc thinks that the word men should here be supplied, and men thy truth ; in which case, the
congregation of the saints will have its proper meaning — an assembly of the pious upon earth; and the Psalmist thus describes
both angels and men as praising God.” — Cresswell .
527 “Literally who is he among the sons of Alim , (or of Gods, as in Psalm 29:1 ,) i.e., according to Suicer, the powerful, the
princes of the earth. Ale, in the singular number, is used to signify God in Deuteronomy 32:17 ; Job 3:4, 23 , (and in other places
of that book;) Daniel 11:38 ; Habakkak 3:3 . But it may be doubted whether its plural, Alim , ever means, as Aleim does, the true
God. We have, however, the sons of Aleim , for chief men , in Genesis 6:2 , and for angels in Job 1:6 ; in which sense some
commentators have understood the sons of Alim both here and in Psalm 29:1 , and with them agrees the Chaldee interpreter of
this place. In Habakkak 1:11 , Ale is used in speaking of the false god of the Chaldeans; and Parkhurst is of opinion, that by the
sons of Alim are meant those kings who worshipped material divinities, such as the sun.” — Cresswell .
255John Calvin Comm on Psalms (V3)
the true and only God, is an explanation of the first. The opinion of some, that by the clouds, or
the heavens, is to be understood the sun, moon, and stars, is disproved by the context itself. The
amount then is, that even in the heavens, God alone has the entire pre-eminence, having there none
as a companion or equal. The appellation the sons of the gods is here given to angels, because they
neither have their origin from the earth, nor are clothed with a corruptible body, but are celestial
spirits, adorned with a Divine glory. It is not meant that they are a part of the Divine essence or
substance, as some fanatics dream; but as God displays his power in them, this title is attributed to
them, to distinguish between their nature and ours. In short, although a greater majesty shines forth
in the angels than in other creatures, at the contemplation of which we are ravished with admiration,
yet come they not near God, so as to obscure and impair his glory by their excellence, or to share
with him in the sovereignty of the universe. This is a point worthy of our careful attention; for,
although God everywhere declares in his word that the angels are only his servants, and always
ready to execute his commands, yet the world, not contented with having only one God, forges for
itself a countless number of deities.
To the same effect is the following verse, in which it is affirmed, that God is very terrible in
the assembly of the saints.  In these words is censured that devilish superstition, to which almost all
men are prone, of exalting angels beyond measure, and without reason. But if the angels themselves
tremble, and are afraid before the Divine Majesty, why should they not be regarded as subjects,
and kept in their own rank, that God alone may have the sovereignty entirely to himself? Farther,
when they are represented as  around God, the meaning is, that they surround his royal throne like
body-guards, and are always ready to execute his behests. In the subsequent verse the same thing
is repeated yet again, Who is a strong God as thou art?  and this is done, that at least the fear of the
Divine Majesty may teach us to beware of robbing him of the honor which belongs to him. That
we may not, however, by too much fear, be prevented from approaching him, some portion of
sweetness is intermingled with this description, when it is declared, that his truth is to be seen round
about him on all sides; by which we are to understand, that God is always steadfast in his promises,
and that whatever changes may happen, he nevertheless continues invariably true, both before and
behind, on the right hand and on the left. 528
Psalm 89:9-14
9. Thou governest the pride of the sea: when the waves thereof rise up, thou restrainest them
10. Thou hast overthrown Egypt, as a wounded man; 529 with thy mighty arm [literally, with the
arm of thy strength] thou hast scattered thy enemies. 11. The heavens are thine, the earth also is
528 Ainsworth reads, “God is daunting terrible.” The original word is     , naarats , from    , arats , he was broken , bruised ,
terrified . “An epithet of God,” says Bythner “as though breaking all things.”
529 Hammond’s explanation of the words, And thy truth is round about thee , conveys a striking and beautiful idea. “The elegance
of the phrase (which is poetical) seems to be taken,” says he, “from the style of angels, verse 7th, where they are described as
they that encompass God; signifying, that as they wait upon God, and execute his will, so, far above the strength of those, God’s
fidelity, his care to perform his promise exactly encompasses him, is ready prest to perform all that he hath ever promised to
do.” — Hammond .
256John Calvin Comm on Psalms (V3)
thine: thou hast made the world, and the fullness thereof. 12. Thou hast created the north 530 and
the south: 531 Tabor and Hermon 532 shall rejoice in thy name. 13. Thou hast a mighty arm: thou
wilt strengthen thy hand, thou wilt exalt thy right hand. 14. Righteousness and judgment are the
place of thy throne: mercy and truth shall go before thy face.
 
9.Thou governest the pride of the sea.  I have already observed that what the prophet has hitherto
spoken generally concerning the power of God, is to be referred to the miracle of the deliverance
of the Israelites from Egypt, which he now celebrates in express terms. According to the
interpretation of some, God is said to still the impetuous waves of the sea, because he does not
suffer it to break forth and overflow the whole world by a deluge. But I would read the 9th and
10th verses connectedly, and would understand the prophet as speaking of the Red Sea, which God
divided to make a way for the chosen tribes to pass over. The Psalmist adds immediately after, that
all the land of Egypt was overthrown as a wounded man  By these words he magnifies the grace of
God, which was displayed in the deliverance of the Church. He intended, there can be no doubt,
to set before his own mind and the minds of others, the paternal love of God, to encourage both
himself and others to have recourse to Him for succor, with the greater freedom and alacrity. And
in affirming that God had broken in pieces his enemies with his mighty arm, he concludes from the
past experience of the Church, that his mode of acting will be always similar, whenever in his
infinite wisdom he sees it to be required.
11The heavens are thine, the earth also is thine.  He again repeats, the third time, that the same
God who had been the deliverer of the chosen people exercises supreme dominion over the whole
world. From the fact that God created all things, he concludes, that it is He who actually presides
over, and controls whatever takes place in heaven and in earth. It would be absurd to suppose, that
the heavens, having been once created by God, should now revolve by chance, and that things
should be thrown into confusion upon the earth either at the will of men, or at random, when it is
considered that it belongs to God to maintain and govern whatever he has created; unless, like the
heathen, we would imagine that he enjoys himself in beholding all the works of his hand, in this
beautiful theater of the heaven and the earth, without giving himself any farther trouble about them.
In speaking of the south and the north, and also of the mountains, Tabor and Hermon, the prophet
530 Horsley renders the clause thus: — Thou hast crushed Rahab, that she lies gasping with her wounds; and has the following
note: — “The word    ,” [for lies gasping with her wounds ,] “as it is used here, and in Psalm 88:5 , signifies not a dead carcass,
but a person left for dead, under his wounds, upon the field of battle; a person so wounded, as to be fallen, and incapable of
rising to defend himself, or annoy the enemy. It answers exactly to the Greek word, τραυματιας , by which the LXX. render it.
We have no corresponding word in the English language.” Dr Adam Clarke reads, “Thou, like a hero, hast broken down Egypt;”
and observes, “Dr Kennicott has largely proved, that    , chalal , which we render wounded , slain , etc., means a soldier , warrior ,
hero; and it is certain that this sense agrees better with it than the other in a great number of places.”
531 “The Hebrew word for ‘the north,’ is derived from a root signifying ‘to hide, conceal.’ The ‘north’ is probably so named;
because in our northern hemisphere of the earth, the sun appears to move from east to south, and from south to west, and, towards
mid-day, is at all times of the year southerly; whence the north side of a building, tree, or mountain, is usually ‘concealed’ or
‘hidden’ from his direct rays, and is, as we express it, in the shade. (See Parkhurst on    , 4.) Simonis, also, assigns this as the
reason of the name, in the judgment of some critics, or, in that of others, because the north is covered with snow, and of others
again, with darkness; and so the Greek word for darkness, ζοφος , is continually used by Homer for the north: for the ancients
thought that the north was always buried in gloom and thick darkness.” —  Mant
532 The original word     , yamin , for “the south,” signifies literally “the right hand.” As the Hebrews, when they engaged in
prayer, turned their faces eastward, they called the East     , the face , and the West,     , the hinder part  The South , therefore,
would necessarily be on their right hand ; and hence,     , yamin , came to be used to denote the south
257John Calvin Comm on Psalms (V3)
accommodates his language to the unrefined apprehension of the common people: as if he had said,
there is no part of the fabric of the world which does not reverence and honor its Creator. I also
connect with this the next verse, which affirms, that the arm of God is furnished with power, his
hand with strength, and that his right hand is exalted  Some resolve the two last clauses of the verse
into the form of a prayer, Strengthen thy hand, lift up thy right hand; but this seems too much
removed from the mind of the prophet, who, with the simple view of encouraging all the godly,
celebrates the inconceivable power of God.
14.Righteousness and judgement are the place of thy throne.  These encomiums serve more
effectually to confirm the hope of true believers than if the Divine power alone had been presented
to our view. Whenever mention is made of God, it behoves us to apply our minds principally to
those attributes of his nature which are specially fitted for establishing our faith, that we may not
lose ourselves by vainly indulging in subtile speculations, by which foolish men, although they
may minister to their own mental recreation, make no advances to the right understanding of what
God really is. The prophet, therefore, in allusion to the insignia and pomp of kings, declares that
righteousness and judgment are the pillars of the throne on which God sits conspicuous in sovereign
state, and that mercy and truth are, as it were, his pursuivants; as if he had said, “The ornaments
with which God is invested, instead of being a robe of purple, a diadem, or a scepter, are, that he
is the righteous and impartial judge of the world, a merciful father, and a faithful protector of his
people.” Earthly kings, from their having nothing in themselves to procure for them authority, and
to give them dignity, 533 are under the necessity of borrowing elsewhere what will invest them
therewith; but God having in himself an all-sufficiency, and standing in no need of any other helps,
exhibits to us the splendor of his own image in his righteousness, mercy, and truth.
Psalm 89:15-18
15. Blessed is the people that know the joyful sound! 534 they shall walk, O Jehovah! in the
brightness of thy countenance. 16. In thy name shall they daily rejoice; and in thy righteousness
shall they glory. 17. For thou art the glory of their strength; and in thy favor shall our horn be
exalted. 18. For to Jehovah 535 is our buckler; and our King is to the Holy One of Israel.
 
15. Blessed is the people that know the joyful sound.  Here the same train of reflection concerning
the Church is pursued, not only because unbelievers are blind to the consideration of God’s works,
533 Tabor is a mountain of Judea, and Hermon (Psalm 133:3 ) of Syria, the former to the west, and the latter to the east of the
Jordan; so that they may be considered as put for the East and the West. Accordingly, the Chaldee paraphrase is, “Thou hast
created the desert of the north, and the inhabitants of the south; Tabor on the west, and Hermon on the east, sing praises to thy
name.” “These mountains,” says Warner, “were at a considerable distance from each other. This indicates, that the most distant
parts of the land shall be equally blessed; have a like cause of rejoicing.”
534 “Pource qu’ils n’ont rien au dedans qui leur acquiere authorite et donne majeste .” — Fr.
535 “O the blessednesses of the people that know the joyful sound; that are spared to hear the sound of the trumpet on the
morning of the jubilee, which proclaims deliverance to the captives, and the restoration of all their forfeited estates!” — Dr
Adam Clarke . “But let us not forget,” says Dr Morison, “that the trumpet of jubilee was a type of the proclamation of peace and
salvation by Jesus Christ. How happy they who, when the gospel trumpet is blown by the heralds of salvation, are enabled to
recognize its joyful sound.”
258John Calvin Comm on Psalms (V3)
but also because the prophet has no other purpose in view than to inspire the godly with good hope,
that they may with confidence rely upon God, and not be discouraged by any adversities from
boldly calling upon him. It is declared that those are happy to whom it is given to rejoice in God;
for although all men in common are sustained and nourished by his liberality, yet the feeling of his
paternal goodness is far from being experienced by all men in such a manner as to enable them,
from a certain persuasion that he is favorable to them, to congratulate themselves upon their happy
condition. It is, therefore, a singular privilege which he confers upon his chosen ones, to make them
taste of his goodness, that thereby they may be encouraged to be glad and rejoice. And, in fact,
there is not a more miserable condition than that of unbelievers, when by their brutish insensibility
they trample under foot the Divine benefits which they greedily devour; for the more abundantly
God pampers them, the fouler is their ingratitude. True happiness then consists in our apprehending
the Divine goodness which, filling our hearts with joy, may stir us up to praise and thanksgiving.
The prophet afterwards proves from the effect, that those who with joy and delight acknowledge
God to be their father are blessed, because they not only enjoy his benefits, but also, confiding in
his favor, pass the whole course of their life in mental peace and tranquillity. This is the import of
walking in the light of God’s countenance: it is to repose upon his providence from the certain
persuasion that he has a special care about our well-being, and keeps watch and ward effectually
to secure it. The expressions rejoicing in his name, and glorying in his righteousness, are to the
same purpose. The idea involved in them is, that believers find in God abundant, yea more than
abundant, ground to rejoice and glory. The word daily appears to denote steadfast and unwavering
perseverance; and thus there is indirectly censured the foolish arrogance of those who, inflated only
with wind and presuming on their own strength, lift up their horns on high. Standing as they do
upon an insecure foundation, they must at length inevitably fall. Whence it follows, that there is
no true magnanimity nor any power which can stand but that which leans upon the grace of God
alone; even as we see how Paul ( Romans 8:31 ) nobly boasts, “If God be for us, who can be against
us?” and defies all calamities both present and to come.
17.For thou art the glory of their strength.  The same sentiment is confirmed when it is declared,
that God never leaves his faithful servants destitute of strength. By the appellation the glory of their
strength,  which is ascribed to him, is meant that they are always so sustained by his present aid as
to have just ground to glory in him; or which amounts to the same thing, that his power appears
always glorious in aiding and sustaining them. They are, however, at the same time, reminded of
the duty of yielding to God all the praise of their being preserved in safety. If this is true as to the
present life, it is much more truly applicable to the spiritual life of the soul. Farther, the more highly
to magnify this instance of God’s liberality, we are taught, at the same time, that it depends entirely
upon his good pleasure, there being no other cause of it. 536 Whence it follows, that they are wholly
bound and indebted to Him who is induced by his free bounty alone to continue to extend to them
his help.
18.For to Jehovah is our buckler.  As the chief protection of the people was in the person of
their king, it is here expressly shown, that the maintenance of the welfare of the faithful by his
instrumentality is the gift of God. But it is to be noticed, that the prophet’s mind was not so fixed
upon this temporal and transitory kingdom as to neglect, at the same time, to consider the end of
536 “The Hebrew      , must be rendered of or from the Lord , in both places in this verse: ‘Of the Lord is our shield or defense;’
‘Of the Lord, or from him,’ ie., of his appointment, ‘is our King.’”—  Hammond
259John Calvin Comm on Psalms (V3)
it, as we shall presently see. He knew that it was only on account of Christ that God made his favor
to flow upon the head of the Church, and from thence upon the whole body. And, in the first place,
while he calls the king metaphorically a buckler , — a figurative expression frequently employed
in Scripture, — he confesses that when the people are defended by his hand and working, it is
nevertheless done by the providence of God, and is thus to be traced to a higher source than human
agency. The same thing is again repeated in the second clause, in which it is affirmed, that the king
was given by God to govern the people; and that, therefore, the defense which comes from the king
is a blessing of God. Moreover, we must remember that what is said of this kingdom, which was
a shadow of something greater, properly applies to the person of Christ, whom the Father has given
to us to be the guardian of our welfare, that we may be maintained and defended by his power.
Psalm 89:19-23
19. Then thou spakest in vision to thy meek ones, 537 and saidst, I have laid help upon a mighty
one; I have exalted one chosen from among the people. 20. I have found David my servant; with
my holy oil [literally with the oil of my holiness] have I anointed him. 21. Therefore, my hand
shall be established with him: my arm also shall strengthen him. 22. The enemy shall not exact
upon him, 538 nor shall the son of iniquity afflict him. 23. And I will break in pieces his oppressors
before his face; and I will strike those who hate him.
 
19.Then thou spakest in vision to thy meek ones.  The Psalmist now declares at greater length
why he said that the king, set over the chosen people for the preservation of the public good, was
given them from heaven; namely, because he was not chosen by the suffrages of men, nor usurped
at his own hand the supreme power, nor insinuated himself into it by corrupt arts, but was elected
by God to be the instrument of maintaining the public good, and performed the duties of his office
under the auspices and conduct of God. The design of the prophet, as we shall shortly see more
clearly, is to distinguish this Divinely-appointed king from all other kings. Although what Paul
teaches in Romans 13:1 , is true, “There is no power but of God;” yet there was a great difference
between David and all earthly kings who have acquired sovereign power by worldly means. God
had delivered the scepter to his servant David immediately with his own hand, so to speak, and had
seated him on the royal throne by his own authority. The particle   , az, which properly signifies
then, is taken also for long since, or in old time. The meaning, therefore, is, that whereas some are
born kings, succeeding their fathers by right of inheritance, and some are elevated to the royal
dignity by election, while others acquire it for themselves by violence and force of arms, God was
the founder of this kingdom, having chosen David to the throne by his own voice. Farther, although
he revealed his purpose to Samuel, yet as the plural number is here used, implying, that the same
oracle had been delivered to others, we may certainly conclude that it had been communicated to
other prophets that they might be able, with one consent, to bear testimony that David was created
537 “Sans qu’il y en ait aucune autre cause .” — Fr.
538 The word in the Hebrew Bible for “thy meek ones” is in the singular number; but in the ancient versions, and in sixty-three
MSS. of Dr Kennicott’s collection, and seventy-one of De Rossi’s, it is in the plural number.
260John Calvin Comm on Psalms (V3)
king by the Divine appointment. And, indeed, as other distinguished and celebrated prophets lived
at that time, it is not very probable that a matter of so great importance was concealed from them.
But Samuel alone is named in this business, because he was the publisher of the Divine oracle and
the minister of the royal anointing. As God in those days spake to his prophets either by dreams or
by visions, this last mode of revelation is here mentioned.
There next follows the substance or amount of the Divine oracle, That God had furnished with
help the strong or mighty one whom he had chosen to be the supreme head and governor of the
kingdom. David is called strong, not because naturally and in himself he excelled in strength, (for,
as is well known, he was of small stature, and despised among his brethren, so that even Samuel
passed him over with neglects) but because God, after having chosen him, endued him with new
strength, and other distinguished qualities suitable for a king; even as in a parallel case, when Christ
chose his apostles, he not only honored them with the title, but at the same time bestowed the gifts
which were necessary for executing their office. And at the present day he imparts to his ministers
the same grace of his Spirit. The strength of David, then, of which mention is here made, was the
effect of his election; for God, in creating him king, furnished him at the same time with strength
adequate for the preservation of the people. This appears still more distinctly from the second
clause, where this invincible strength is traced to its source: I have exalted one chosen from among
the people.  All the words are emphatic. When God declares that he exalted him, it is to intimate
the low and mean condition in which David lived, unknown and obscure, before God stretched out
his hand to him. To the same effect is the expression which follows,  from among the people.  The
meaning is, that he was at that time unnoted, and belonged to the lowest class of the people, and
gave no indications of superior excellence, being the least esteemed of his father’s children, in
whose country cottage he held the humble office of a herdsman. 539 By the word chosen, God calls
us back to the consideration of his own free will, as if he forbade us to seek for any other cause of
David’s exaltation than his own good pleasure.
20I have found David my servant.  The prophet confirms the same proposition, That there was
nothing of royalty in David, who owed all to the sovereignty of God in preventing him by his grace.
Such is the import of the word  found, as if God had said, When I took him to elevate him, this
proceeded entirely from my free goodness. The name servant, therefore, does not denote any merit,
but is to be referred to the divine call. It is as if God had said, that he confirmed and ratified by his
authority the sovereign power of David; and if He approved it, its legitimacy is placed beyond all
doubt. The second clause of the verse affords an additional confirmation of God’s free election:
With my holy oil have I anointed him.  This anointing, which was not the fruit of David’s own policy,
but which he obtained contrary to all expectation, was the cause of his elevation to the estate of
royalty. God then having of himself, and according to his mere good pleasure, anticipated David,
that he might anoint him king by the hand of Samuel, he justly declares that he found him. It is
afterwards added, that he will be the guardian and protector of this kingdom of which he was the
founder; for it is not his usual way to abandon his works after having commenced them, but, on
the contrary, to carry them forward by a continued process of improvement to their completion.
539 “L’ennemi n’aura puissance sur luy .” — Fr. “The enemy shall not have power over him.”
261John Calvin Comm on Psalms (V3)
22The enemy shall not exact upon him.540 Here it is declared in express terms, that although
David may not be without enemies, the power of God will be always ready to maintain and defend
him, that he may not be oppressed with unrighteous violence. It is accordingly affirmed, that David
will not be tributary to his enemies, as he who is vanquished in battle is constrained to grant such
conditions of peace as his conqueror may dictate, however injurious to himself these may be. When
his enemies are called sons of iniquity, it is tacitly intimated, that this government will be so exempt
from tyranny and extortion, that whoever shall attempt to overthrow it will be involved in the
perpetration of wrong and wickedness. The amount is, that David and his successors will be so
secure and strongly fortified by the divine protection, that it will be impossible for their enemies
to treat them as they would wish. In regard to the fact, that God suffered this kingdom to be greatly
afflicted, so that David’s successors were constrained to pay a vast amount of tribute to foreign
and heathen kings, it is not at variance with this promise; for, although the power of the kingdom
was reduced, it was enough that the root still remained, until Christ came, in whose hand the kingdom
was at length firmly established. As both the king and the people wickedly rejected this singular
blessing of God, the kingdom was often shaken through their own default, afterwards impaired,
and finally ruined. Yet God, to confirm his oracle concerning the perpetuity of this kingdom, ceased
not all along to cherish and preserve some hope, by contending against their ingratitude. Besides,
when mention is made of David’s haters and oppressors, it is intimated, that this throne will not
be privileged with exemption from annoyances and troubles, inasmuch as there will be always
some who will rise up in hostility against it, unless God set himself in opposition to them.
Psalm 89:24-29
24. My truth and my mercy shall be with him: and in my name shall his horn be exalted. 25.
And I will set his hand in the sea, and his right hand in the rivers. 54126. He shall cry to me, Thou
art my Father, my God, and the Rock of my salvation. 27. I will also make him my first-born, 542
higher than the kings of the earth. 28. And I will keep my mercy for him for ever, and my covenant
shall stand fast with him. 29. And I will establish his seed for ever, and his throne as the days of
heaven.
 
24My truth and my mercy shall be with him.  God shows that he will continue to exercise without
intermission that grace which he had manifested towards David at first. These words are as if he
had said, that to prove himself faithful to his word, he would be always gracious and bountiful.
Thus We see that God, not only at the outset, furnished David with testimonies of his goodness,
540 “Quum ultimus esset in rustico tugurio, et inter pecuarios .” — Lat. “Veu qu’il estoit le plus petit en la maison de son pere,
et qu’en ce mesnage de village il estoit de ceux qui gardoyent les bestes .” — Fr.
541 “The allusion appears to us to be made to a cruel and unjust creditor, who exacts not only his just debts, but some exaggerated
demand, with usurious interest, which was not permitted.” — Williams .
542 This means, that David’s power should extend from the Mediterranean, or Great Sea, to the river Euphrates. Gejerus and
Le Clerc have illustrated this passage from a speech addressed to Alexander by the Scythian ambassadors, in Q. Curtius, 50, 7.”
Si Dii habitum corporis tui aviditati animi parem esse voluissent, orbis te non caperet; altera manu orientem, altera occidentem
contingeres .” “If the gods had given thee a body proportionable to thy insatiable mind, the world would not be able to contain
thee. Thou wouldst stretch forth one hand to the furthest extremities of the east, and the other to the utmost west.”
262John Calvin Comm on Psalms (V3)
but that he always continued to deal with him in the same merciful way. This has a reference to the
whole Church of Christ, so that the divine goodness is manifested in the whole course of our
salvation, and not only at our first entrance upon it, as these shufflers and sophists the Sorbonists
foolishly talk. 543The horn of David denotes here, as it often does in other places, his glory, dignity,
and power. The meaning therefore is, that by the grace of God, this kingdom shall always flourish
and prosper.
25.And I will set his hand in the sea.  The vast extent of the kingdom is here adverted to. As
the people by their wickedness had, as it were, blocked up the way, and intercepted the blessing of
God, their inheritance was more limited than the promise implied. But now God declares, that
during the reign of David, it will be again enlarged, so that the people shall possess the whole
country, from the sea even to the river Euphrates. From this we gather, that what God had promised
by Moses was fulfilled only in the person of David, that is to say, from his time. 544 By the rivers
may be understood, either the Euphrates alone, which is cut into many channels, or the other
neighboring rivers on the coast of Syria.
26.He shall cry to me, Thou art my Father.  In this verse it is declared, that the chief excellence
of this king will consist in this, that he will be accounted the Son of God. This indeed is a title of
honor, which is applied to all whom God ordains to be kings, as we have seen in a previous psalm,
“I have said, Ye are gods; and all of you are children of the Most High:”
(Psalm 82:6 )
but in the passage before us, something special is expressed of the holy king whom God had
chosen, and it is intended to say, that he will be the son of God in a different sense. We shall
immediately see in the subsequent verse, how he is placed in a higher rank than the kings of the
earth, although they may sway the scepter over a larger extent of country. It was therefore a privilege
peculiar to only one king in this world, to be called the Son of God. Had it been otherwise, the
apostle reasoned not only inconclusively but absurdly, in quoting this text as a proof of the doctrine,
that Christ is superior to the angels:
“I will be to him a Father, and he shall be to me a Son,”
(Hebrews 1:5 .)
Angels, and kings, and all who are regenerated by the Spirit of adoption, are called sons of God;
but David, when God promises to take him for his son, is, by singular prerogative, elevated above
all others to whom this designation is applied. This is still more apparent from the following verse,
in which he is called God’s first-born, because he is higher than all the kings of the earth; and this
is an honor which transcends all the dignity both of men and angels. If it is objected, that David
being a mortal man could not be equal to the angels, the obvious answer is, that if he is considered
in himself, he cannot justly be elevated to the same rank with them, but with the highest propriety
he may, in so far as for a time he represented the person of Christ.
28.And I will keep my mercy to him for ever.  We see how God frequently repeats, that he had
set up the kingdom of David with the express design of establishing it for ever. By placing his
mercy first in order, and then adding his covenant, he points out the cause of this covenant, intimating
543 “Iwill make him my first-born ; i.e., as the eldest son of a family ranks the highest, and receives the most from his father,
so shall David be first in the order of kings, who, when they are legitimate sovereigns, may be regarded as the sons of God, their
common Father: comp. Genesis 27:1 , etc.; Exodus 4:22 ; Deuteronomy 21:17 ; Psalm 2:7 ; Colossians 1:15 . In Isaiah 14:30 , by
the first-born of the poor , is meant the extreme of that class, they who are the poorest of the poor.” — Cresswell .
544 “Sicuti nugantur Sophistae .” —  Lat. “Comme gazouillent ces brouillons et Sophistes de Sorbonistes .” — Fr.
263John Calvin Comm on Psalms (V3)
in one word, that it is gratuitous, and that his grace is not only the foundation on which it rests, but
also the cause why it is preserved inviolate. The amount is, that God will be always merciful to
David, in order that his covenant may never fail. From this it follows, that its inviolability depends
upon the mere good pleasure of God. In the next verse, God expresses the effect of his truth,
declaring, that the posterity of David will sit for ever on the royal throne. There being nothing under
heaven of long continuance, the days of heaven is an expression employed to denote everlasting
duration. Whence it follows, that this prophecy cannot have its full accomplishment in any till we
come to Christ, in whom alone, in the strict and proper sense, this everlasting duration is to be
found.
Psalm 89:30-37
30. If his children shall forsake my law, and walk not in my judgments; 31. If they violate 545
my ordinances, and keep not my statutes; 32. Then will I visit their transgression with my rod, 546
and their iniquity with stripes. 33. But my loving-kindness will I not withdraw from him; nor suffer
my faithfulness to fail, [literally, nor will I lie in my truth.] 34. My covenant will I not break, nor
alter that which hath proceeded from my lips. 35. Once have I sworn by my holiness, That I will
not lie 547 to David. 36. His seed shall endure for ever; and his throne as the sun before me.  37. It
shall be established for ever as the moon, and a faithful witness in the heaven. 548 Selah.
 
30.If his children shall forsake my law.  The prophet proceeds yet farther, declaring, that although
the posterity of David should fall into sin, yet God had promised to show himself merciful towards
them, and that he would not punish their transgressions to the full extent of their desert. Moreover,
to give the promise the greater efficacy, he always introduces God speaking, as if he presented to
him a request corresponding with the precise words and express articles of his covenant. 549 It was
very necessary that this should be added; for so easily do we slide into evil, and so prone are we
to continual falls, that unless God, in the exercise of his infinite mercy, pardoned us, there would
not be a single article of his covenant which would continue steadfast. God, therefore, seeing that
it could not be otherwise, but that the posterity of David, in so far as it depended upon themselves,
would frequently fall from the covenant, by their own fault, has provided a remedy for such cases,
in his pardoning grace.
Farther, as it is profitable for men to be subjected to divine correction, he does not promise that
he will allow them to escape unpunished, which would be to encourage them in their sins; but he
promises, that in his chastisements he will exercise a fatherly moderation, and will not execute
545 “C’est a dire, de son temps .”
546 The original word for “they violate” is      , yechallelu , from    , chalal , he perforated or pierced through  “When said of
sacred things, he profaned , violated , polluted , prostituted , as though, pierced through divine things.” —  Bythner
547 “In virga .” — Lat. “Avec ma verge .” — Fr.
548 Heb. ‘if I lie,’ the most solemn form of negative in that language.” — Williams .
549 “The whole passage, beginning with ‘I have laid help,’ in verse 19, to the end of verse 37, may be considered as a paraphrase
of what God had said unto David, ( 2 Samuel 7:8 , etc.,) through the mouth of Nathan. The promises herein recited, we know
from history, had their fulfillment only in Jesus Christ. The Psalmist, therefore, in the next subsequent verses, contemplating
the calamities of his nation, indulges in the language of complaint.” — Cresswell .
264John Calvin Comm on Psalms (V3)
vengeance upon them to the full extent which their sins deserve. It is also to be observed, that he
promises pardon, not only for light offenses, but also for great and aggravated sins. It is not without
cause that he uses these forms of expression, to forsake his law, to violate his statutes, not to walk
in his judgments, and not to keep his commandments  Nor is it without cause that he uses the word
transgression, or perfidiousness, and iniquity. We see, then, that the patience and lenity of God,
by which he reconciles to himself the posterity of David, is extended even to sins of the most
heinous and aggravated description.
This passage teaches us, that when God adopts men into his family, they do not forthwith
completely lay aside the flesh with its corruptions, as is held by some enthusiasts, who dream, that
as soon as we are grafted into the body of Christ, all the corruption that is in us must be destroyed.
Would to God that we could all on a sudden change our nature, and thus exhibit that angelic
perfection which they require! But as it is quite apparent, that we are far from such an attainment,
so long as we carry about with us this tabernacle of flesh, let us bid adieu to that devilish figment,
and let us all betake ourselves to the sanctuary of forgiveness, which is at all times open for us.
God, unquestionably, is speaking of the household of his Church; and yet it is declared, with
sufficient plainness, in the promise which he makes of pardoning their offenses, that they will
transgress and be guilty of revolting from him.
To limit what is here said to the ancient people of Israel, is an exposition not only absurd, but
altogether impious. In the first place, I take it as a settled point, which we have already had occasion
often to consider, that this kingdom was erected to be a figure or shadow in which God might
represent the Mediator to his Church: and this can be proved, not only from the testimony of Christ
and the apostles, but it may also be clearly and indubitably deduced from the thing considered in
itself. If we set Christ aside, where will we find that everlasting duration of the royal throne of
which mention is here made? The second from David, in the order of succession, was despoiled of
the greater part of the kingdom, so that out of twelve tribes he retained scarcely one tribe and a
half. Afterwards, how many losses did this kingdom thus greatly reduced sustain, and by how many
calamities was it defaced, until at length the king and the whole body of the people were dragged
into captivity, with the utmost ignominy and reproach? And I pray you to consider where was the
dignity of the throne, when the king, after his sons were put to death before his eyes, was himself
treated as a criminal? ( 2 Kings 25:7 .) The Jews were indeed afterwards permitted to dwell in their
own country; but it was without the honor and title of a kingdom. Accordingly, Ezekiel ( Ezekiel
21:27 ) declares thrice, that the crown shall be laid in the dust, “until he come whose right it is.”
The obvious conclusion then is, that perpetuity, as applied to this kingdom, can be verified in Christ
alone. And, in fact, what access could the Jews of old time have had to God, or what access could
we in the present day have to him, did not the Mediator come between us and him, to cause us find
favor in his sight?
It now remains that we apply to ourselves the qualities of this kingdom of which we have been
speaking. As its everlasting duration leads us to the hope of a blessed immortality, and its invincible
strength inspires our minds with tranquillity, and prevents our faith from failing, notwithstanding
all the efforts which Satan may put forth against us, and notwithstanding the numerous forms of
death which may surround us; so the pardon which is here promised belongs to the spiritual kingdom
of Christ: and it may be equally gathered from this passage, that the salvation of the Church depends
solely upon the grace of God, and the truth of his promises. If it is objected, that those who are
regenerated by the Spirit of God never totally fall away, because the incorruptible seed of the word
265John Calvin Comm on Psalms (V3)
abides in them, I grant that this is an important truth. It is not, however, a total apostasy which is
here spoken of — not such as implies the entire extinction of godliness in the individual chargeable
with it. But it sometimes happens that the faithful cast off the yoke of God, and break forth into sin
in such a manner, as that the fear of God seems to be extinguished in them; and such being the
case, it was necessary that He should promise the pardon even of heinous sins, that they might not
upon every fall be overwhelmed with despair. Thus David seemed, to outward appearance, to be
wholly deprived of the Spirit of God, whom he prays to be restored to him. The reason why God
leaves hope of pardon even for detestable and deadly transgressions is, that the enormity of our
sins may not keep us back or hinder us from seeking reconciliation with him. From this, we are led
to condemn the undue severity of the fathers, who scrupled to receive to repentance those who had
fallen for the second or third time. Due care must indeed be taken lest, by too great forbearance,
loose reins should be given to men to commit iniquity; but there is no less danger in an extreme
degree of rigour. It is to be observed, that when God declares that he will show himself merciful
towards sinners, who have violated his law, and broken his commandments, he purposely employs
these odious terms to excite our hatred and detestation of sin, and not to entice us to the commission
of it. Still, however, we must understand the passage as amounting to this, That although the faithful
may not in every instance act in a manner worthy of the grace of God, and may therefore deserve
to be rejected by him, yet he will be merciful to them, because remission of sins is an essential
article promised in his covenant. And, indeed, as God in his law requires us to perform what exceeds
our power, all that he promises in it is of no avail to us, to whom it can never be accomplished.
Hence Paul, in Romans 4:14 , affirms, “If the inheritance come by the law, faith is made void, and
the promise made of none effect.” To this also belong these words of Jeremiah,
“Behold, the days come, saith the Lord, that I will make a new covenant with the house of
Israel, and with the house of Judah; not according to the covenant that I made with their fathers, in
the day that I took them by the hand to bring them out of the land of Egypt; (which my covenant
they brake, although I was an husband unto them, saith the Lord;) but this shall be the covenant
that I will make with the house of Israel: After those days, saith the Lord, I will put my law in their
inward parts, and write it in their hearts; and will be their God, and they shall be my people. I will
forgive their iniquity, and I will remember their sin no more.” ( Jeremiah 31:31-34 )
Farther, since God does not adopt us as his children, to encourage us to take liberty to commit
sin with the greater boldness, mention is here made at the same time of chastisement, by which he
shows that he hates the sins of his children, and, warning them of what they have deserved in
offending him, invites and exhorts them to repentance. This fatherly chastisement then, which
operates as medicine, holds the medium between undue indulgence, which is an encouragement to
sin, and extreme severity, which precipitates persons into destruction. Here the inspired writer
adverts to the prophecy recorded in 2 Samuel 7:14 , where God declares that in chastising his own
people, he will proceed after the manner of men —
“If he commit iniquity, I will chasten him with the rod of men, and with the stripes of the
children of men.” ( 2 Samuel 7:14 )
God there speaks of his chastising his people after the manner of men, either because the anger
of a father in correcting his children proceeds from love, — for he sees that otherwise he would
fail in promoting their good; or it contains a contrast between God and men, implying, that in the
task of chastising he will proceed with moderation and gentleness; for, were he to put forth his
strength, he would immediately bring us to nothing, yea, he could do this simply by moving one
266John Calvin Comm on Psalms (V3)
of his fingers. The scope of both passages undoubtedly is, that whenever God punishes the sins of
true believers, he will observe a wholesome moderation; and it is therefore our duty to take all the
punishments which he inflicts upon us, as so many medicines. On this point, the Papists have
egregiously blundered. Not understanding the true end and fruit of chastisements, they have imagined
that God proceeds herein as if avenging himself upon sinners. Whence arose their satisfactions,
and from these again proceeded pardons and indulgences, by which they endeavored to redeem
themselves from the hand and vengeance of God. 550 But God has nothing else in view than to
correct the vices of his children, in order that, after having thoroughly purged them, he may restore
them anew to his favor and friendship; according to the words of Paul in 1 Corinthians 11:33 , which
affirm that the faithful “are chastened of the Lord, that they should not be condemned with the
world.” For this reason, lest they should be overwhelmed with the weight of chastisement, he
restrains his hand, and makes considerate allowance for their infirmity. Thus the promise is fulfilled,
That he does not withdraw his loving-kindness from  his people, even when he is angry with them;
for, while he is correcting them for their profit and salvation, he does not cease to love them. It is,
however, to be observed, that there is a change of person in the words. After it is said, If his children
shall forsake my law, etc., it is at length subjoined , My loving-kindness or mercy will I not withdraw
from Him . It ought surely to have been said, them instead of him, since it is children in the plural
number who are before spoken of. But it is very probable that this form of expression is purposely
employed to teach us that we are reconciled to God only through Christ; and that if we would expect
to find mercy, we must seek for it from that source alone. What follows in the end of the verse, I
will not suffer my faithfulness to fail, is more emphatic than if it had been said that God will be true
to what he has said. It is possible that God’s promise may fail of taking effect, and yet he may
continue faithful. For example, the law is true and holy, and yet of what advantage is it to us that
salvation is promised in the law, when no human being can ever obtain salvation by it? God then
in this passage leads us farther; promising that his covenant shall be steadfast and effectual, not
only because he will be faithful on his part, but also because he will keep his people from falling
away through their own inconstancy.
34My covenant will I not break.  As the true knowledge of God’s mercy can only be obtained
from his word, he enjoins us to keep our eyes intently fixed upon his covenant. The more excellent
and invaluable a blessing it is, “Never to be rejected after having been once adopted by him,” the
more difficult it is for us to believe its truth. And we know how many thoughts from time to time
present themselves to our minds, tempting us to call it in question. That the faithful, therefore, may
not harass themselves beyond measure in debating in their own minds whether or no they are in
favor with God, they are enjoined to look to the covenant, and to embrace the salvation which is
offered to them in it. God here commends to us his own faithfulness, that we may account his
promise sufficient, and that we may not seek the certainty of our salvation any where else. He had
said above, If the children of David break my statutes;  and now, alluding to that breach, he declares
that he will not requite them as they requite him,  My covenant will I not break,  implying, that
although his people may not altogether act in a manner corresponding to their vocation, as they
ought to do, he will not suffer his covenant to be broken and disannulled on account of their fault,
because he will promptly and effectually prevent this in the way of blotting out their sins by a
550 “Acsi ex conceptis pacti verbis cum eo ageret .” — Lat. “Comme s’il luy presentoit requeste suyvant les propres mots et
articles expres de son alliance .” — Fr.
267John Calvin Comm on Psalms (V3)
gratuitous pardon. He is still pursuing the illustration of the preceding proposition, I will not suffer
my faithfulness to fail; promising not only to be faithful on his side, as we say, but also that what
he has promised shall take full effect, in despite of all the impediments which men may cast in the
way; for he will strive against their sins, that by means of them the fruit of his goodness may not
be prevented from reaching them. When the Jews, by their ingratitude and treachery, revolted from
him, the covenant was not disannulled, because it was founded upon the perfect immutability of
his nature. And still, at the present day, when our sins mount even to the heavens, the goodness of
God fails not to rise above them, since it is far above the heavens.
35.Once have I sworn by my holiness. God now confirms by an oath what he previously stated
he had promised to David; from which it appears that it was not a matter of small importance; it
being certain that God would not interpose his holy name in reference to what was of no consequence.
It is a token of singular loving-kindness for him, upon seeing us prone to distrust, to provide a
remedy for it so compassionately. We have, therefore, so much the less excuse if we do not embrace,
with true and unwavering faith, his promise which is so strongly ratified, since in his deep interest
about our salvation, he does not withhold his oath, that we may yield entire credence to his word.
If we do not reckon his simple promise sufficient, he adds his oath, as it were, for a pledge. The
adverb once,551 denotes that the oath is irrevocable, and that therefore we have not the least reason
to be apprehensive of any inconstancy. He affirms that he sware by his holiness, because a greater
than himself is not to be found, by whom he could swear. In swearing by Him, we constitute him
our judge, and place him as sovereign over us, even as he is our sovereign by nature. It is a more
emphatic manner of expression for him to say, by my holiness, than if he had said, by myself, not
only because it magnifies and exalts his glory, but also because it is far more fitted for the
confirmation of faith, calling back, as it does, the faithful to the earthly habitation which he had
chosen for himself, that they might not think it necessary for them to seek him at a distance; for by
the term holiness, I have no doubt, he means the sanctuary. And yet he swears by himself, and by
nothing else; for, in naming the temple which he had appointed as his seat, he does not depart from
himself; but, merely accommodating his language to our rude understandings, swears by his holiness
which dwells visibly upon earth. With respect to the elliptical form of the oath, we have seen, in a
previous psalm, that this was a manner of swearing quite common among the Hebrews. Thus they
were warned that the name of God was not to be used without due consideration, lest, by using it
rashly and irreverently, they should draw down upon themselves the Divine vengeance. The abrupt
and suspended form of expression was, as it were, a bridle to restrain them, and give them opportunity
for reflection. It is no uncommon thing for God to borrow something from the common custom of
men.
36.His seed shall endure for ever. There now follows the promise that the right of sovereignty
shall always remain with the posterity of David. These two things — his offspring and his throne,
are conjoined; and by these words the everlasting duration of the kingdom is promised, so that it
should never pass to those who were of a strange and different race. The sun and the moon are
produced as witnesses; for although they are creatures subject to corruption, they yet possess more
stability than the earth or air; the elements, as we see, being subject to continual changes. As the
whole of this lower world is subject to unceasing agitation and change, there is presented to us a
more steadfast state of things in the sun and moon, that the kingdom of David might not be estimated
551 “Par lesqnels moyens ils ont pensé se racheter pour eschapper la main et vengence de Dieu .” — Fr.
268John Calvin Comm on Psalms (V3)
according to the common order of nature. Since, however, this royal throne was shaken in the time
of Rehoboam, as we have before had occasion to remark, and afterwards broken down and
overthrown, it follows that this prophecy cannot be limited to David. For although at length the
outward majesty of this kingdom was put an end to without hope of being re-established, the sun
ceased not to shine by day, nor the moon by night. Accordingly, until we come to Christ, God might
seem to be unfaithful to his promises. But in the branch which sprung from the root of Jesse, these
words were fulfilled in their fullest sense. 552
Psalm 89:38-45
38. But thou hast abhorred and rejected him; thou hast been angry against thy anointed. 39.
Thou hast made the covenant of thy servant to cease; 553 thou hast profaned his crown to the earth.
40. Thou hast broken down all his walls; thou hast made his fortresses a ruin. 41. All who pass by
the way have spoiled him: he has been a reproach to his neighbors. 42. Thou hast exalted the right
hand of his oppressors; thou hast caused all his enemies to rejoice. 43. Thou hast also blunted the
edge of his sword, and hast not made him to stand in battle. 44. Thou hast effaced his splendor,
and cast his throne to the ground.  45. Thou hast shortened the days of his youth; thou hast covered
him with shame. Selah.
 
38.But thou hast abhorred and rejected him.  Here the prophet complains that in consequence
of the decayed state of the kingdom, the prophecy appeared to have failed of its accomplishment.
Not that he accuses God of falsehood; but he speaks in this manner, that he may with all freedom
cast his cares and griefs into the bosom of God, who permits us to deal thus familiarly with him.
It doubtless becomes us to frame our desires according to the divine will; but that person cannot
be said to pass beyond due bounds who humbly laments that he is deprived of the tokens of the
divine favor, provided be does not despair, or rebelliously murmur against God; and we shall
afterwards see that the prophet, when he blesses God at the close of the psalm, affords a proof of
tranquil submission, by which he corrects or qualifies his complaints. Whoever, therefore, that
Rabbin was who maintained that it is unlawful to recite this psalm, he was led by a foolish and
impious peevishness to condemn what God bears with in his children. In taking this liberty of
expostulating with God, the prophet had no other object in view than that he might the more
effectually resist distrust and impatience, by unburdening himself in the divine presence. Farther,
552 “Once . Emphatic. It needs not to be repeated: nor will be.” — Walford .
553 “There is a very obvious and important observation to be made on the description of the apparent change that had taken
place in the conduct of God towards the family and descendants of David. The extraordinary promises which had been given to
that prince were certainly not accomplished in the fortunes of his descendants, the kings of Judah; nor shall we be able to discover
how the truth of these promises is to be sustained without an admission of their being given in reference to the Messiah, that
spiritual king, who ‘was born of the seed of David, according to the flesh.’ When we take the assurances which were made to
David, and which pledged to him the perpetuity of his kingdom, in this sense, the mystery is disclosed, and the difficulty is
completely removed: ‘the loving-kindness of God has not been withdrawn from him, nor has his faithfulness failed.’ David has
still a royal successor, though the genealogy of his posterity is lost upon earth; a successor who will endure for ever, and whose
throne will be perpetuated in glory, not merely as long as the sun and the moon continue, but will still be rising in splendor,
when those lights of heaven shall be extinguished, and the new heaven and the new earth shall witness the imperishable glories
of the Son of God.” — Walford .
269John Calvin Comm on Psalms (V3)
the words, Thou hast abhorred and rejected him,  if criticised according to the rules of the Greek
and Latin language, will be pronounced inelegant; for the word which is most emphatic is put first,
and then there is added another which is less emphatic. But as the Hebrews do not observe our
manner of arrangement in this respect, the order here adopted is quite consistent with the idiom of
the Hebrew language. The third verb contains the reason of this change on the part of God, teaching
us that the king was rejected because God was incensed against him. It is thought by some that
there is here a recital of the mockery in which the enemies of the chosen people indulged, an opinion
which they adopt to avoid the difficulty arising from viewing this severe kind of complaint, as
uttered by the Church, which proved such a stumbling-block to the Rabbin above referred to, that
on account of it he condemned the whole psalm. But it is to be observed, that the prophet speaks
according to the common feeling and apprehension of men; while at the same time he was fully
convinced in his own mind, that the king who had been once chosen by God could not be rejected
by him.
In the same sense we ought to understand what follows (verse 39) concerning the disannulling
of the covenant — Thou hast made the covenant of thy servant to cease.  The prophet does not
charge God with levity and inconstancy: he only complains that those notable promises of which
he had spoken had to appearance vanished and come to nought. Whenever the faithful put the
question,
“How long wilt thou forget me, O Lord?” “Awake, why sleepest thou, O Lord?”
(Psalm 13:1; 44:23; 79:5 ,)
they assuredly are not to be understood as attributing forgetfulness or sleep to him: they only
lay before him the temptations which flesh and blood suggest to them in order to induce him speedily
to succor them under the infirmity with which they are distressed. It is not then wonderful, though
the prophet, amidst such horrible desolation, was affected by the infirmities to which human nature
is so liable in such circumstances, and thus prompted to make the assertion, that what God promised
was far from being manifestly realised. When he saw all things going contrary to the Divine promise,
he was not a man so steel-hearted as to remain unmoved at so pitiable and confused a spectacle.
But coming freely into the Divine presence, he seeks a remedy that he might not be swallowed up
with sorrow, which would have been the case had he indulged in secret repining, and neglected
this means of alleviation. What is added in the close of the verse, Thou hast cast his crown to the
earth, does not seem to apply to the time of Rehoboam, unless, perhaps, the dismemberment of the
kingdom may be denoted by the casting of the crown to the earth. The statements which are made
immediately after must necessarily be referred to some greater calamity. If this is admitted, the
author of the psalm must have been a different person from Ethan, who was one of the four wise
men, of whom mention is made in the sacred history, ( 2 Kings 4:31 .) In so doubtful a case, I leave
every one to adopt the conjecture which appears to him the most probable.
40.Thou hast broken down all his walls. The prophet, although he might easily have found
another cause to which to impute the breaking down and razing of the fortifications, yet under the
influence of devout and sanctified feeling acknowledges God to be the author of this calamity;
being fully convinced that men could not at their pleasure have destroyed the kingdom which God
had set up had not the Divine anger been kindled. Afterwards speaking metaphorically, he complains
that the kingdom was exposed as a prey to all passers-by, resembling a field or garden, of which
the walls were broken down, and the ground laid open to depredation. As an aggravation of a
calamity which in itself was sufficiently grievous, the additional indignity is brought forward, that
270John Calvin Comm on Psalms (V3)
the king was a reproach to his neighbors. The worldly and the profane, there can be no doubt,
finding an opportunity so much according to their wishes, derided him, saying, Is this that king of
God’s choice, a king more excellent than the angels, and whose throne was to continue as long as
the sun and the moon should endure? As these railings recoiled upon God himself, the prophet
justly complains of the reproachful derision with which God’s Anointed was treated, whose dignity
and royal estate were ratified and confirmed by heavenly anointing.
42 Thou hast exalted the right hand of his oppressors.  Here he states that God took part with
the enemies of the king; for he was well aware that these enemies could not have prevailed but by
the will of God, who inspires some with courage, and renders others faint-hearted. In short, in
proportion to the number of the calamities which had befallen the chosen people, was the number
of the evidences of their having been forsaken by God; for, so long as he continued his favor, the
whole world, by all their machinations, were unable to impair the stability of that kingdom. Had it
been said that the enemies of the king obtained the victory, the statement would have been quite
true; but it would not have been a mode of expression so obviously fitted to exalt the Divine power;
as it might have been thought that men setting themselves in opposition to God had, by their own
power, forced their way, and effected their purpose, even against those who enjoyed his protection.
Accordingly, the prophet reflects with himself, that unless the Divine anger had been incensed, that
kingdom which God had erected could not have been reduced to a condition so extremely wretched.
45.Thou hast shortened the days of his youth.  Some would explain this sentence as meaning,
that God had weakened the king, so that he faded or withered away at his very entrance upon the
flower of youth, and was exhausted with old age before reaching the period of manhood. 554 This
exposition may be regarded as not improbable; but still it is to be observed, in order to our having
a clearer understanding of the mind of the prophet, that he does not speak exclusively of any one
individual, but compares the state of the kingdom to the life of man. His complaint then amounts
to this, That God caused the kingdom to wax old, and finally to decay, before it reached a state of
complete maturity; its fate resembling that of a young man, who, while yet increasing in strength
and vigor, is carried away by a violent death before his time. This similitude is highly appropriate;
for the kingdom, if we compare the state of it at that period with the Divine promise, had scarce
yet fully unfolded its blossom, when, amidst its first advances, suddenly smitten with a grievous
decay, its freshness and beauty were defaced, while at length it vanished away. Moreover, what
we have previously stated must be borne in mind, that when the prophet complains that the issue
does not correspond with the promise, or is not such as the promise led the chosen people to expect,
he does not, on that account, charge God with falsehood, but brings forward this apparent discrepancy
for another purpose — to encourage himself, from the consideration of the Divine promises, to
come to the throne of grace with the greater confidence and boldness; and, while he urged this
difficulty before God, he was fully persuaded that it was impossible for Him not to show himself
faithful to his word. As the majority of men drink up their sorrow and keep it to themselves, because
they despair of deriving any benefit from prayer so true believers, the more frankly and familiarly
they appeal to God in reference to his promises, the more valiantly do they wrestle against their
distrust, and encourage themselves in the hope of a favorable issue.
554 “Ou, as quitte l’alliance de ton serviteur .” — Fr. marg . “Or, thou hast quitted the covenant of thy servant.”
271John Calvin Comm on Psalms (V3)
Psalm 89:46-48
46. How long, O Jehovah? wilt thou hide thyself for ever? shall thy fury burn like fire? 47.
Remember of what age I am! 555 why shouldst thou have created all the sons of men in vain? 556
48. What man shall live, and shall not see death? shall he deliver his soul [or life] from the hand
of the grave? 557 Selah.
 
46.How long, O Jehovah? wilt thou hide thyself for ever?  After having poured forth his
complaints respecting the sad and calamitous condition of the Church, the Psalmist now turns
himself to prayer. Whence it follows that the language of lamentation to which he had hitherto
given utterance, although it emanated from carnal sense, was nevertheless conjoined with faith.
Unbelievers, in the agitation of trouble, may sometimes engage in prayer, yet whatever they ask
proceeds from feigned lips. But the prophet, by connecting prayer with his complaints, bears
testimony that he had never lost his confidence in the truth of the Divine promises. With respect
to this manner of expression, How long, for ever? we have spoken on Psalm 79:5 , where we have
shown that it denotes a long and continued succession of calamities. Moreover, by asking How
long God will hide himself, he tacitly intimates that all will be well as soon as God is pleased to
look upon his chosen people with a benignant countenance. In the second clause of the verse, he
again mentions as the reason why God did not vouchsafe to look upon them with paternal favor,
that his anger was incensed against them. The obvious conclusion from which is, that all the
afflictions endured by us proceed from our sins; these being the scourges of an offended God.
47 Remember how short my time is.  After having confessed that the severe and deplorable
afflictions which had befallen the Church were to be traced to her own sins as the procuring cause,
the prophet, the more effectually to move God to commiseration, lays before him the brevity of
human life, in which, if we receive no taste of the Divine goodness, it will seem that we have been
created in vain. That we may understand the passage the more clearly, it will be better to begin
with the consideration of the last member of the verse, Why shouldst thou have created all the sons
of men in vain?  The faithful, in putting this question, proceed upon an established first principle,
That God has created men and placed them in the world, to show himself a father to them. And,
indeed, as his goodness extends itself even to the cattle and lower animals of every kind, 558 it cannot
555 Some of the Jewish interpreters take this view, and suppose the allusion to be to king Jehoiachin, ( 2 Kings 24:8 .) Kennicott
infers from the expression, “Thou hast shortened the days of his youth,” that this portion of the psalm refers to Ahaz, who died
at thirty-six years of age.
556 “‘Remember at what an age or time of life I am.’ Or, ‘of what duration,’ or, ‘how fleeting,’    , (by a transposition of letters
from    , he ceased ,) denotes the present time rapidly passing away. Or, the short race of our life; or this world, ‘the fashion of
which passeth away,’ ( 1 Corinthians 7:31 .)” — Bythner
557 Ainsworth reads, “O call thou to remembrance how transitory I am; into what vain state thou hast made all the sons of
Adam.”
558 This appeal respecting the universality of death, and the impossibility of avoiding it, meets with a ready response in the
bosom of every child of Adam, however exalted or humble his lot. And, when death has once seized on its victim, all the wealth,
power, and skill of the world cannot spoil the grave of its dominion. The admirable lines of Gray, in his celebrated Elegy, furnish
a very good comment on this verse: —
“The boast of heraldry, the pomp of power,
And all that beauty, all that wealth e’er gave,
Await alike th’ inevitable hour: —
The paths of glory lead but to the grave.
272John Calvin Comm on Psalms (V3)
for a moment be supposed, that we, who hold a higher rank in the scale of being than the brute
creation, should be wholly deprived of it. Upon the contrary supposition, it were better for us that
we had never been born, than to languish away in continual sorrow. There is, moreover, set forth
the brevity of the course of our life; which is so brief, that unless God make timely haste in giving
us some taste of his benefits, the opportunity for doing this will be lost, since our life passes rapidly
away. The drift of this verse is now very obvious. In the first place, it is laid down as a principle,
That the end for which men were created was, that they should enjoy God’s bounty in the present
world; and from this it is concluded that they are born in vain, unless he show himself a father
towards them. In the second place, as the course of this life is short, it is argued that if God does
not make haste to bless them, the opportunity will no longer be afforded when their life shall have
run out.
But here it may be said, in the first place, that the saints take too much upon them in prescribing
to God a time in which to work; and, in the next place, that although he afflict us with continual
distresses, so long as we are in our state of earthly pilgrimage, yet there is no ground to conclude
from this that we have been created in vain, since there is reserved for us a better life in heaven, to
the hope of which we have been adopted; and that, therefore, it is not surprising though now our
life is hidden from us on earth. I answer, That it is by the permission of God that the saints take
this liberty of urging him in their prayers to make haste; and that there is no impropriety in doing
so, provided they, at the same time, keep themselves within the bounds of modesty, and, restraining
the impetuosity of their affections, yield themselves wholly to his will. With respect to the second
point, I grant that it is quite true, that although we must continue to drag out our life amidst continual
distresses, we have abundant consolation to aid us in bearing all our afflictions, provided we lift
up our minds to heaven. But still it is to be observed, in the first place, that it is certain, considering
our great weakness, that no man will ever do this unless he has first tasted of the Divine goodness
in this life; and, secondly, that the complaints of the people of God ought not to be judged of
according to a perfect rule, because they proceed not from a settled and an undisturbed state of
mind, but have always some excess arising from the impetuosity or vehemence of the affections
at work in their minds. I at once allow that the man who measures the love of God from the state
of things as presently existing, judges by a standard which must lead to a false conclusion;
“for whom the Lord loveth he chasteneth,” ( Hebrews 12:6 .)
But as God is never so severe towards his own people as not to furnish them with actual
experimental evidence of his grace, it stands always true that life is profitless to men, if they do
not feel, while they live, that He is their father.
As to the second clause of the verse, it has been stated elsewhere that our prayers do not flow
in one uniform course, but sometimes betray an excess of sorrow. It is, therefore, not to be wondered
at that the faithful, when immoderate sorrow or fear occupies their thoughts and keeps fast hold of
them, experience such inattention stealing by degrees upon them, as to make them for a time forget
to keep their minds fixed in meditation upon the life to come. Many think it very unaccountable,
if the children of God do not, the first moment they begin to think, immediately penetrate into
“Can storied urn, or animated bust,
Back to its mansions call the fleeting breath?
Can Honour’s voice provoke the silent dust,
Or Flatt’ry soothe the dull cold ear of Death?”
273John Calvin Comm on Psalms (V3)
heaven, as if thick mists did not often intervene to impede or hinder us when we would look
attentively into it. For faith to lose its liveliness is one thing, and for it to be utterly extinguished
is another. And, doubtless, whoever is exercised in the judgments of God, and in conflict with
temptations, will acknowledge that he is not so mindful of the spiritual life as he ought to be.
Although then the question, Why shouldst thou have created all the sons of men in vain?  is deduced
from a true principle, yet it savours somewhat of a faulty excess. Whence it appears that even in
our best framed prayers, we have always need of pardon. There always escapes from us some
language or sentiment chargeable with excess, and therefore it is necessary for God to overlook or
bear with our infirmity.
48.What man shall live, and shall not see death?  This verse contains a confirmation of what
has been already stated concerning the brevity of human life. The amount is, that unless God speedily
hasten to show himself a father to men, the opportunity of causing them to experience his grace
will no longer exist. The original word    , geber, which we have translated man, is derived from
the verb    , gabar, he was strong, or he prevailed; and the sacred writer employs this word, the
more forcibly to express the truth, that no man is privileged with exemption from the dominion of
death.
Psalm 89:49-52
49. O Lord! where are thy former mercies? thou hast sworn to David in thy truth. 50. O Lord!
Remember the reproach of thy servants: I have sustained in my bosom all the reproaches of mighty
peoples; 51. With which thy enemies, O Jehovah! have reproached thee; with which they have
reproached the footsteps of thy Messiah, [or thy Anointed.] 52. Blessed be Jehovah for ever! Amen,
and Amen.
 
49.O Lord! where are thy former mercies?  The prophet encourages himself, by calling to
remembrance God’s former benefits, as if his reasoning were, That God can never be unlike himself,
and that therefore the goodness which he manifested in old time to the fathers cannot come to an
end. This comparison might indeed make the godly despond, when they find that they are not dealt
with by him so gently as he dealt with the fathers, did not another consideration at the same time
present itself to their minds — the consideration that he never changes, and never wearies in the
course of his beneficence. As to the second clause of the verse, some interpreters connect it with
the first, by interposing the relative, thus: — Where are thy former mercies  which thou hast sworn?
In this I readily acquiesce; for the sense is almost the same, although the relative be omitted. God
had given evident and indubitable proofs of the truth of the oracle delivered to Samuel; 559 and,
therefore, the faithful lay before him both his promise and the many happy fruits of it which had
been experienced. They say, in truth, that they may with the greater confidence apply to themselves,
whatever tokens of his liberality God had in old time bestowed upon the fathers; for they had the
same ground to expect the exercise of the Divine goodness towards them as the fathers had, God,
559 “Sur les asnes et chevaux, et autres bestes brutes .” — Fr. “To asses and horses, and other brute beasts.”
274John Calvin Comm on Psalms (V3)
who is unchangeably the same, having sworn to be merciful to the posterity of David throughout
all ages.
50.O Lord! remember the reproach of thy servants.  They again allege, that they are held in
derision by the ungodly, — a consideration which had no small influence in moving God to
compassion: for the more grievous and troublesome a temptation it is, to have the wicked deriding
our patience, that, after having made us believe that God is not true in what he has promised, they
may precipitate us into despair; the more ready is he to aid us, that our feeble minds may not yield
to the temptation. The prophet does not simply mean that the reproaches of his enemies are to him
intolerable, but that God must repress their insolence in deriding the faith and patience of the godly,
in order that those who trust in him may not be put to shame. He enhances still more the same
sentiment in the second clause, telling us, that he was assailed with all kind of reproaches by many
peoples, or by the great peoples, for the Hebrew word     , rabbim, signifies both great and many
Moreover, it is not without cause, that, after having spoken in general of the servants of God,
he changes the plural into the singular number. He does this, that each of the faithful in particular
may be the more earnestly stirred up to the duty of prayer. The expression, in my bosom, is very
emphatic. It is as if he had said, The wicked do not throw from a distance their insulting words,
but they vomit them, so to speak, upon the children of God, who are thus constrained to receive
them into their bosom, and to bear patiently this base treatment. Such is the perversity of the time
in which we live, that we have need to apply the same doctrine to ourselves; for the earth is full of
profane and proud despisers of God, who cease not to make themselves merry at our expense. And
as Satan is a master well qualified to teach them this kind of rhetoric, the calamities of the Church
always furnish them with matter for exercising it. Some take bosom for the secret affection of the
heart; but this exposition seems to be too refined.
51.With which thy enemies, O Jehovah! have reproached thee.  What the Psalmist now affirms
is, not that the wicked torment the saints with their contumelious language, but that they revile even
God himself. And he makes this statement, because it is a much more powerful plea for obtaining
favor in the sight of God, to beseech him to maintain his own cause, because all the reproaches by
which the simplicity of our faith is held up to scorn recoil upon himself, than to beseech him to do
this, because he is wounded in the person of his Church; according as he declares in Isaiah,
“Whom hast thou reproached and blasphemed; and against whom hast thou exalted thy voice,
and lifted up thine eyes on high? even against the Holy One of Israel.” ( Isaiah 37:23 )
That wicked robber Rabshakeh thought that he scoffed only at the wretched Jews whom he
besieged, and whose surrender of themselves into his hands he believed he would soon witness;
but God took it as if he himself had been the object whom that wicked man directly assailed. On
this account also, the prophet calls these enemies of his people the enemies of God; namely, because
in persecuting the Church with deadly hostility, they made an assault upon the majesty of God,
under whose protection the Church was placed.
In the second clause, by the footsteps of Messiah or Christ is meant the coming of Christ, even
as it is said in Isaiah 52:7 ,
“How beautiful upon the mountains are the feet of him that bringeth good tidings, that publisheth
peace!” ( Isaiah 52:7 )
The Hebrew word    , akeb, sometimes signifies the heel; but here, as in many other passages,
it signifies the sole of the foot. Others translate it the pace or step, but this gives exactly the same
sense. There can be no doubt, that footsteps, by the figure synecdoche, is employed to denote the
275John Calvin Comm on Psalms (V3)
feet; and again, that by the feet, according to the figure metonomy, is meant the coming of Christ.
The wicked, observing that the Jews clung to the hope of redemption, and patiently endured all
adversities because a deliverer had been promised them, disdainfully derided their patience, as if
all that the prophets had testified concerning the coming of Christ had been only a fable. 560 And
now also, although he has been once manifested to the world, yet as, in consequence of his having
been received up into the glory of heaven, he seems to be far distant from us, and to have forsaken
his Church, these filthy dogs scoff at our hope, as if it were a mere delusion.
52.Blessed be Jehovah for ever!  I am surprised why some interpreters should imagine, that
this verse was added by some transcriber in copying the book, affirming, that it does not correspond
with the context: as if the language of praise and thanksgiving to God were not as suitable at the
close of a psalm as at the opening of it. I have therefore no doubt, that the prophet, after having
freely bewailed the calamities of the Church, now, with the view of allaying the bitterness of his
grief, purposely breaks forth into the language of praise. As to the words Amen, and Amen, I readily
grant, that they are here employed to distinguish the book. 561 But whoever composed this psalm,
there is no doubt, that by these words of rejoicing, the design of the writer was to assuage the
greatness of his grief in the midst of his heavy afflictions, that he might entertain the livelier hope
of deliverance.
560 “De la revelation faite a Samuel .” — Fr.
561 Or, as if our Redeemer were slow-paced, halt, or lame, and his Church should never behold his steps. With this agrees the
Chaldee paraphrase: — “The slowness of the footsteps of the feet of thy Messiah or anointed.” Kimchi renders, “the delays of
the Messiah;” “the discourse,” he observes, “being of those who say that he will never come.” A similar style of speech has been
employed by the enemies of the gospel, as Calvin goes on to observe, who scoffingly asked in the days of the apostles, and who
still ask, “Where is the promise of his coming?” 2 Peter 3:4 .
276John Calvin Comm on Psalms (V3)
